                                          Fetpype: An Open-Source Pipeline for Reproducible
                                                      Fetal Brain MRI Analysis

                                              Thomas Sanchez 1,2,* , Gerard Martı́-Juan 3,* , David Meunier 4 , Miguel Angel
                                              Gonzalez Ballester 3,5 , Oscar Camara 3 , Elisenda Eixarch 6,7 , Gemma Piella 3 ,
                                                           Meritxell Bach Cuadra 1,2 , and Guillaume Auzias 4
                                                                 1
                                                                      CIBM – Center for Biomedical Imaging, Switzerland
                                                 2
                                                    Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Lausanne University
                                                                       Hospital and University of Lausanne, Switzerland
arXiv:2512.17472v2 [eess.IV] 3 Feb 2026




                                                        3
                                                          BCN MedTech, Department of Engineering, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain
                                                      4
                                                        Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, Institut de Neurosciences de La Timone, France
                                                                                    5
                                                                                      ICREA, Barcelona, Spain
                                               6
                                                 BCNatal — Fetal Medicine Research Center (Hospital Clı́nic and Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
                                                                         Universitat de Barcelona), Barcelona, Spain
                                           7
                                             Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain and Centre
                                                           for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain
                                                                                        *
                                                                                          Equal contribution




                                          1    Summary

                                          Fetal brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is crucial for assessing neurodevelopment in
                                          utero. However, fetal MRI analysis remains technically challenging due to fetal motion, low
                                          signal-to-noise ratio, and the need for complex multi-step processing pipelines. These pipelines
                                          typically include motion correction, super-resolution reconstruction, tissue segmentation, and
                                          cortical surface extraction. While specialized tools exist for each individual processing step,
                                          integrating them into a robust, reproducible, and user-friendly end-to-end workflow remains
                                          difficult. This fragmentation limits reproducibility across studies and hinders the adoption of
                                          advanced fetal neuroimaging methods in both research and clinical contexts.

                                          Fetpype addresses this gap by providing a standardized, modular, and reproducible framework
                                          for fetal brain MRI preprocessing and analysis, enabling researchers to process raw T2-weighted
                                          acquisitions through to derived volumetric and surface-based outputs within a unified workflow.


                                          2    Statement of need

                                          Fetpype is an open-source Python package designed to streamline and standardize the prepro-
                                          cessing and analysis of T2-weighted fetal brain MRI data. The package targets the fetal neu-
                                          roimaging community, where methodological heterogeneity and complex software dependencies
                                          have historically limited reproducibility and comparability across studies.

                                          Existing fetal brain MRI tools typically focus on individual processing steps and require cus-
                                          tomized code for pre- and post-processing, as well as to connect different modules, making
                                          it difficult to reproduce processing results across studies. Fetpype addresses these challenges


                                                                                           1
Figure 1: The different steps covered by Fetpype. Starting from several T2-weighted stacks of
thick slices of the fetal brain (acquisition), Fetpype pre-processes data before feeding them to a
super-resolution reconstruction algorithm that fuses them into a single high-resolution volume.
This volume then undergoes segmentation, before moving to cortical surface extraction.


by providing a configurable, containerized, and Nipype-driven solution that integrates state-
of-the-art fetal MRI processing tools into a cohesive pipeline. By emphasizing reproducibility,
extensibility, and ease of use, Fetpype lowers the barrier to applying advanced fetal MRI anal-
ysis methods and facilitates consistent processing across sites, scanners, and studies. In doing
so, Fetpype improves comparability across studies and supports community collaboration by
facilitating the dissemination of new image processing methods for clinical applications. The
pipeline is publicly available on GitHub.


3    State of the field

Fetal brain MRI analysis relies on a range of specialized tools that address individual pro-
cessing steps, particularly motion correction and super-resolution reconstruction. Widely used
reconstruction frameworks include SVRTK (C++) [9, 17], NiftyMIC (Python) [3], and NeSVoR
(Python/PyTorch) [19]. While increasingly distributed as containers, these tools rely on dis-
tinct data organization schemes as well as custom pre- and post-processing steps. Downstream
processing tools for brain extraction, segmentation, and surface reconstruction show similar
diversity, combining Python scripts, compiled binaries, and domain-specific imaging libraries
[11, 18, 5, 1]. As a result, constructing an end-to-end fetal MRI workflow typically requires cus-
tom scripting to orchestrate multiple containers, manage data formats, and handle intermediate
outputs, limiting reproducibility and accessibility.

Fetpype was built to address these limitations by providing a unified, Python-based frame-
work to integrate existing containerized tools for fetal brain MRI analysis. By enforcing data
formatting following the widely-used Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) standard [7], and
leveraging containerized execution and Nipype-based workflow management [8]and Hydra-based
configuration [20], Fetpype provides a standardized and scalable environment for reproducible
end-to-end fetal brain MRI analysis on both local workstations and large-scale computing clus-
ters.


                                                2
4     Software design

Fetpype is built around four core design principles: data standardization, containerization,
workflow orchestration, and flexible configuration:


    1. Data Standardization: Fetpype expects input data organized according to the Brain
       Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) standard [7], promoting interoperability and simplifying
       data management.

    2. Containerization: Individual processing tools are encapsulated within Docker or Singu-
       larity containers. This ensures reproducibility and reduces installation issues, providing a
       better experience for the end user.

    3. Workflow Management: The Nipype library [8] is used to construct processing work-
       flows. It provides a robust interface for combining different steps from different containers
       or packages, facilitating data caching and parallelization, and allowing pipelines to be
       easily shareable.

    4. Configuration: Pipeline configuration is managed using simple YAML files and the
       Hydra library [20], allowing users to easily select between different modules or parameters
       without directly modifying the code.


The current implementation of Fetpype integrates modules for:

    • Data preprocessing: including brain extraction using Fetal-BET [5], non-local means
      denoising [12], and N4 bias-field correction [16], all wrapped into a single container built
      at https://github.com/fetpype/utils_container.

    • Super-resolution reconstruction: implementing three widely used pipelines: NeSVoR
      [19], SVRTK [9, 17], and NiftyMIC [3].

    • Segmentation: implementing BOUNTI [18] and the Developing Human Connectome
      Project pipeline [11].

    • Cortical surface extraction: using a custom implementation available at https://
      github.com/fetpype/surface_processing based on [1, 2, 10].

The overall processing workflow is summarized in Figure 1.


5     Research impact statement

Fetpype is the result of a longstanding collaboration within a European consortium of re-
searchers specializing in fetal neuroimaging. Its default configurations and processing work-
flows have been the result of extensive testing to achieve robust processing on data acquired
across multiple hospitals in France, Spain, and Switzerland, covering a range of scanners and
acquisition protocols.

The framework has been used to process large-scale fetal MRI datasets within the consortium,
has contributed to a first publication [14], and is supporting ongoing research projects. Fetpype
is used by multiple research groups and has begun to receive external contributions, including


                                                 3
pull requests that integrate additional processing methods. This suggests that Fetpype ad-
dresses a clear methodological need and can serve as shared community infrastructure for fetal
brain MRI research.

In the future, we plan to supplement Fetpype with an automated reporting library contain-
ing automated quality control [15], subject-wise and population-wise biometry and volumetry
[4, 13], as well as spectral analysis of surfaces [6]. We welcome community contributions, par-
ticularly implementations of new methods that can be integrated into the existing containerized
workflow framework.


AI usage disclosure

GitHub Copilot, integrated within Visual Studio Code, was used during software development
to assist with code completion and implementation. ChatGPT (GPT-5.2) was used for proof-
reading and language refinement of the manuscript. The authors take full responsibility for the
written content.


Acknowledgements

This work was funded by Era-net NEURON MULTIFACT project (TS: Swiss National Science
Foundation grants 31NE30 203977, 215641; GA: French National Research Agency, Grant ANR-
21-NEU2-0005; EE: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII) grant AC21 2/00016; GMJ, GP, OC,
MAGB: Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities: MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/),
the SulcalGRIDS Project, (GA: French National Research Agency Grant ANR-19-CE45-0014),
the pediatric domain shifts project (TS: SNSF 205320-215641), and NVIDIA research grants
with the use of NVIDIA RTX6000 ADA GPUs. We acknowledge the CIBM Center for Biomed-
ical Imaging, a Swiss research center of excellence founded and supported by CHUV, UNIL,
EPFL, UNIGE and HUG.


References

 [1] Pierre-Louis Bazin and Dzung L Pham. Topology correction using fast marching methods
     and its application to brain segmentation. In International Conference on Medical Image
     Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 484–491. Springer, 2005.

 [2] Pierre-Louis Bazin and Dzung L Pham. Topology correction of segmented medical im-
     ages using a fast marching algorithm. Computer methods and programs in biomedicine,
     88(2):182–190, 2007.

 [3] Michael Ebner, Guotai Wang, Wenqi Li, Michael Aertsen, Premal A Patel, Rosalind Augh-
     wane, Andrew Melbourne, Tom Doel, Steven Dymarkowski, Paolo De Coppi, et al. An
     automated framework for localization, segmentation and super-resolution reconstruction
     of fetal brain mri. NeuroImage, 206:116324, 2020.

 [4] Oscar Esteban, Daniel Birman, Marie Schaer, Oluwasanmi O Koyejo, Russell A Poldrack,
     and Krzysztof J Gorgolewski. Mriqc: Advancing the automatic prediction of image quality
     in mri from unseen sites. PloS one, 12(9):e0184661, 2017.



                                              4
 [5] Razieh Faghihpirayesh, Davood Karimi, Deniz Erdoğmuş, and Ali Gholipour. Fetal-BET:
     Brain extraction tool for fetal MRI. IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in Medicine and
     Biology, 2024.

 [6] David Germanaud, Julien Lefèvre, Roberto Toro, Clara Fischer, Jessica Dubois, Lucie
     Hertz-Pannier, and Jean-Francois Mangin. Larger is twistier: spectral analysis of gyrifi-
     cation (spangy) applied to adult brain size polymorphism. NeuroImage, 63(3):1257–1272,
     2012.

 [7] Krzysztof J Gorgolewski, Tibor Auer, Vince D Calhoun, R Cameron Craddock, Samir
     Das, Eugene P Duff, Guillaume Flandin, Satrajit S Ghosh, Tristan Glatard, Yaroslav O
     Halchenko, et al. The brain imaging data structure, a format for organizing and describing
     outputs of neuroimaging experiments. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.

 [8] Krzysztof J Gorgolewski, Christopher D Burns, Cindee Madison, Dav Clark, Yaroslav O
     Halchenko, Michael L Waskom, and Satrajit S Ghosh. Nipype: a flexible, lightweight and
     extensible neuroimaging data processing framework in python. Frontiers in neuroinfor-
     matics, 5:13, 2011.

 [9] Maria Kuklisova-Murgasova, Gerardine Quaghebeur, Mary A Rutherford, Joseph V Hajnal,
     and Julia A Schnabel. Reconstruction of fetal brain MRI with intensity matching and
     complete outlier removal. Medical image analysis, 16(8):1550–1564, 2012.

[10] Qiang Ma, Liu Li, Emma C Robinson, Bernhard Kainz, Daniel Rueckert, and Amir
     Alansary. Cortexode: Learning cortical surface reconstruction by neural odes. IEEE Trans-
     actions on Medical Imaging, 42(2):430–443, 2022.

[11] Antonios Makropoulos, Emma C Robinson, Andreas Schuh, Robert Wright, Sean Fitzgib-
     bon, Jelena Bozek, Serena J Counsell, Johannes Steinweg, Katy Vecchiato, Jonathan
     Passerat-Palmbach, et al. The developing human connectome project: A minimal process-
     ing pipeline for neonatal cortical surface reconstruction. Neuroimage, 173:88–112, 2018.

[12] José V Manjón, Pierrick Coupé, Luis Martı́-Bonmatı́, D Louis Collins, and Montserrat
     Robles. Adaptive non-local means denoising of mr images with spatially varying noise
     levels. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 31(1):192–203, 2010.

[13] Sara Neves Silva, Alena Uus, Hadi Waheed, Simi Bansal, Kamilah St Clair, Wendy Norman,
     Jordina Aviles Verdera, Daniel Cromb, Tomas Woodgate, Milou Van Poppel, et al. Scanner-
     based real-time automated volumetry reporting of the fetus, amniotic fluid, placenta, and
     umbilical cord for fetal mri at 0.55 t. Magnetic resonance in medicine, 2025.

[14] Thomas Sanchez, Angeline Mihailov, Gerard Martı́-Juan, Nadine Girard, Aurélie Manchon,
     Mathieu Milh, Elisenda Eixarch, Vincent Dunet, Mériam Koob, Léo Pomar, et al. Data
     quality biases normative models derived from fetal brain mri. bioRxiv, pages 2026–01, 2026.

[15] Thomas Sanchez, Vladyslav Zalevskyi, Angeline Mihailov, Gerard Martı́-Juan, Elisenda
     Eixarch, Andras Jakab, Vincent Dunet, Mériam Koob, Guillaume Auzias, and Meritx-
     ell Bach Cuadra. Automatic quality control in multi-centric fetal brain mri super-resolution
     reconstruction. In Perinatal, Preterm and Paediatric Image Analysis, pages 3–14, Cham,
     2026. Springer Nature Switzerland.

[16] Nicholas J Tustison, Brian B Avants, Philip A Cook, Yuanjie Zheng, Alexander Egan,
     Paul A Yushkevich, and James C Gee. N4ITK: improved n3 bias correction. IEEE trans-
     actions on medical imaging, 29(6):1310–1320, 2010.



                                               5
[17] Alena U Uus, Irina Grigorescu, Milou PM van Poppel, Johannes K Steinweg, Thomas A
     Roberts, Mary A Rutherford, Joseph V Hajnal, David FA Lloyd, Kuberan Pushparajah,
     and Maria Deprez. Automated 3D reconstruction of the fetal thorax in the standard atlas
     space from motion-corrupted MRI stacks for 21–36 weeks ga range. Medical image analysis,
     80:102484, 2022.

[18] Alena U. Uus, Vanessa Kyriakopoulou, Antonios Makropoulos, Abi Fukami-Gartner, Daniel
     Cromb, Alice Davidson, Lucilio Cordero-Grande, Anthony N. Price, Irina Grigorescu, Lo-
     gan Z. J. Williams, Emma C. Robinson, David Lloyd, Kuberan Pushparajah, Lisa Story,
     Jana Hutter, Serena J. Counsell, A. David Edwards, Mary A. Rutherford, Joseph V. Haj-
     nal, and Maria Deprez. Bounti: Brain volumetry and automated parcellation for 3d fetal
     mri. August 2023.

[19] Junshen Xu, Sayeri Lala, Borjan Gagoski, Esra Abaci Turk, P Ellen Grant, Polina Gol-
     land, and Elfar Adalsteinsson. NeSVoR: Implicit neural representation for slice-to-volume
     reconstruction in MRI. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2023.

[20] Omry Yadan. Hydra - a framework for elegantly configuring complex applications. Github,
     2019.




                                              6
