                                                   Causal Inference for Unobservable Multivariate
                                                   Outcomes, with Applications to Brain Effective
                                                                    Connectivity

                                                                Haiyue Song1 , Ani Eloyan1 , Youjin Lee∗,1 , and
                                                            for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative†
                                                    1
                                                        Department of Biostatistics, Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA
arXiv:2604.00390v1 [stat.ME] 1 Apr 2026




                                                                                          Abstract

                                                   Evaluating the causal effect of an intervention on multivariate outcomes is challenging

                                                when the outcomes are interdependent and derived rather than directly observed. Effec-

                                                tive connectivity, which summarizes the directional neural communication between brain

                                                regions, is one such derived relational outcome. Estimating how external interventions af-

                                                fect effective connectivity introduces two layers of causal inference problems: identifying

                                                directional relationships among brain regions from high-dimensional neuroimaging time

                                                series and estimating the causal effect of the intervention on these derived relationships.

                                                Each layer introduces distinct biases. The first arises from within-outcome dependencies

                                                unrelated to the intervention; to address this, we propose a sample-splitting method for es-

                                                timating meaningful, and potentially causally informative, effective connectivity measures.

                                                The second arises from confounding between the intervention and the derived outcomes;

                                                to address this, we apply inverse probability weighting methods and incorporate multiple

                                                testing when causal effects on multiple components of the outcomes are of interest. We

                                                demonstrate, through theoretical results and simulations, that the proposed methods are

                                                asymptotically valid under certain conditions with effective type-I and familywise error

                                                control. Finally, we apply the proposed methods to examine the causal effect of amyloid

                                                on effective connectivity using the resting-state fMRI data from the Alzheimer’s Disease
                                            ∗
                                                Correspondence: Youjin Lee, Department of Biostatistics, Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.
                                          youjin lee@brown.edu
                                              †
                                                Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Ini-
                                          tiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the
                                          design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in the analysis or writ-
                                          ing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-
                                          content/uploads/how to apply/ADNI Acknowledgement List.pdf


                                                                                              1
      Neuroimaging Initiative database.

      Keywords: Brain effective connectivity; Causal inference; Latent outcomes; Selective in-

      ference.



1     Introduction

    Evaluating the causal effect of an intervention on multivariate outcomes is challenging, partic-
ularly when inference targets specific components of the outcome rather than an overall outcome.
In such settings, valid inference requires accounting not only for potential confounding between
the intervention and the outcomes, but also for dependence among outcome components that
may induce spurious associations. For example, consider the causal effect of an external interven-
tion on functional synchrony of the human brain, as quantified by effective connectivity between
pairs of brain regions. Effective connectivity refers to the directional interactions among brain
regions (Friston, 1994, Stephan and Friston, 2010). In this context, the inferential goal is to
examine how an intervention alters these directional interaction patterns, while accounting for
the fact that baseline connectivity may exist even in the absence of intervention. A key chal-
lenge, therefore, is to disentangle dependence among outcome components to obtain effective
connectivity measures valid for downstream causal inference, while also addressing confounding
between different intervention groups.
    A further challenge in causal inference with such multivariate, relational outcomes is that the
outcomes of interest are often defined in an abstract way or in a measure-specific manner. In
many applications, outcomes of interest are not directly observed but are constructed through
model-based approaches. For instance, effective connectivity is typically inferred using para-
metric or semi-parametric models, yet there is no generally accepted framework for defining or
estimating directional interactions among brain regions. Similar issues arise in other domains,
including psychology (VanderWeele, 2022, Gilbert, 2025), political science (Knox et al., 2022,
Stoetzer et al., 2025), and genomics (Lozano et al., 2009). In such settings, causal inference
proceeds on outcomes that are themselves estimated, potentially introducing additional layers
of uncertainty and bias into causal effect estimation.
    The overarching goal of this study is to develop a novel method for examining causal effects of
an intervention on multivariate, relational outcomes derived from time-series data. The setting


                                                 2
presents two important inferential challenges. First, dependence among outcome components,
some of which may reflect underlying causal relationships, can induce spurious associations
between the intervention and individual outcome components. Second, the relationships between
the intervention and the multivariate outcomes may be subject to confounding. We propose a
framework that addresses both challenges for valid causal inference for interdependent, derived
multivariate outcomes.


1.1    Motivating application

   As a motivating application, we consider the causal effect of brain amyloid positivity on
effective connectivity. Amyloid plaque accumulation is an important pathological feature of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Alzheimer’s Association, 2025), and in vivo amyloid burden measured
using positron emission tomography (PET) is a widely used biomarker for disease diagnosis and
monitoring of disease progression. Prior studies have reported associations between increased
amyloid burden and alterations in brain networks and connectivity patterns (Palmqvist et al.,
2017, Moffat et al., 2022). Notably, amyloid positivity in this study is determined based on PET
imaging and is distinct from the our outcomes from functional neuroimaging data.
   We use data from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) available at
adni.loni.usc.edu, a multi-center longitudinal study established to facilitate research on AD and
the development and validation of disease biomarkers. Our analysis focuses on participants from
ANDI phases 3 and 4, during which both amyloid PET and resting-state functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) data were collected. Resting-state fMRI captures temporal variation
in blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signals across the brain. Following standard ADNI
preprocessing protocols, we extract regional time series by aggregating voxel-level signals within
prespecified regions of interest (ROI). In addition to imaging data, baseline covariates commonly
associated with amyloid burden and brain connectivity are available, including sex, age, years of
education, and apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 carrier status.
   This application raises several fundamental questions. First, how can one construct effective
connectivity measures from subject-level time-series data that are interpretable and causally
informative? Second, under what conditions is it valid to use such derived measures as outcomes
for causal inference?


                                                3
1.2      Background and previous studies

   A key challenge in causal inference with multivariate outcomes is separating intervention
effects from dependence among outcome components. Apparent effect on individual components
may arise from associations induced by dependence with other components, rather than from
direct causal effect of the intervention. One approach to isolating direct effects is to construct
outcome components so that each represents a conditional feature of the data-generating process,
thereby isolating the contribution attributable to the intervention. In the context of time-series
data, this can be achieved by defining each component conditional on the historical information
from all remaining components.
   When outcomes are indexed by multiple units (e.g., regions), identifying an appropriate
conditioning set becomes challenging due to the high dimensionality. In effective connectivity
literature, data-driven variable selection and dimension-reduction approaches are commonly used
to construct conditioning sets (Zhou et al., 2009, Liao et al., 2010, Tang et al., 2012). However,
such approaches often introduce post-selection inference issues, as the resulting estimators and
test statistics depend on data-adaptive model selection, violating assumptions underlying clas-
sical inferential procedures based on fixed models and hypotheses (Kuchibhotla et al., 2022).
Sample-splitting methods are widely used to mitigate post-selection bias by separating model
construction from inference through random partitioning of the data. While their validity is well
understood under independence assumptions (Tibshirani et al., 2016), extending these guaran-
tees to temporally autocorrelated data requires additional conditions (Lunde, 2019, Xi et al.,
2022).
   Even when multivariate outcomes are constructed to be interpretable for downstream causal
inference, it remains unclear under what conditions such quantities can be treated as observed
outcomes for the purposes of causal inference. This issue has become increasingly salient with
the growing use of algorithmically derived or predicted outcomes, including latent representa-
tions obtained using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and deep learning, in which outputs of prediction
algorithms are directly incorporated as outcomes in causal effect estimation (Modarressi et al.,
2025). Recent work has begun to address causal inference with multidimensional derived out-
comes. Qiu et al. (2024) establish identification conditions and multiple testing procedures for
such settings, and Du et al. (2025) extend this framework by introducing doubly robust estima-


                                                4
tion. These approaches, however, do not address dependence induced during the construction
of the outcome measures themselves; rather, they account for dependence only at the level of
estimated causal effects through multiple testing.


1.3    Contribution and outline of the paper

   Our main contributions of this paper are as follows. First, we propose a unified approach that
integrates the construction of multivariate, interdependent outcomes from time-series data with
principled causal inference methods. We introduce two conceptual perspectives on derived out-
comes and establish the distinct statistical and causal assumptions required for each perspective.
Second, we propose an asymptotically valid sample-splitting strategy for constructing causally
informative relational outcome measures from time-series data for valid downstream causal anal-
ysis of intervention effects. Third, we establish the large-sample properties of the proposed
intervention effect estimators in settings with interdependent and unobservable outcomes, and
show how existing multiple testing procedures can be incorporated to account for dependence
among the estimators. Overall, these developments enable causal inference when the outcomes
are derived or estimated and exhibit both within-outcome and model-derived dependencies.
   This reminder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce notation,
data structure, causal estimands, and identification conditions. Section 3 proposes effective
connectivity measures and introduces their construction from time-series data using sample-
splitting approaches. In Section 4, we present procedures for estimation and hypothesis testing of
intervention effects on the derived effective connectivity outcomes. Section 5 conducts simulation
studies evaluating the finite-sample performance of the proposed method and comparing them
with alternative approaches. We apply our proposed methods to investigate the effect of amyloid
PET positivity on effective connectivity in the human brain in Section 6. Section 7 concludes
with a discussion of the findings, limitations, and directions for future work.




                                                5
2     Notation and target estimands

2.1     Notation and data structure

    Let i (i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} := [1 : n]) index subjects to which the unique intervention of interest
can be exposed. Let j (j ∈ [1 : p]) index outcome units (e.g., brain regions), with pairs of regions
defining units of effective connectivity. We consider a binary intervention for simplicity, denoted
by Zi ∈ {0, 1} for subject i. To adjust for potential confounding, we consider a vector of baseline
covariates Wi for subject i, assumed to be time invariant. The outcome of interest is multivariate
and indexed by ordered pairs of outcome units. Specifically, let Yi = (Yi(1,2) , Yi(1,3) , ..., Yi(p,p−1) )⊤ ,
where, for example, Yi(j1 j2 ) represents the effective connectivity from region j1 to region j2 (j1 , j2 ∈
[1 : p], j1 ̸= j2 ). These outcomes are typically not directly observed and must instead be derived
                                                                                b i . Let X (t)
from subject-specific time-series data. We denote the derived outcome vector by Y          ij

denote the time-series measurement for subject i at outcome unit j at time t (i ∈ [1 : n], j ∈
                                [1:T ]
[1 : p], t ∈ [1 : T ]). Define Xij , or equivalently X
                                                     e ij , to represent the collection of time-series
                                              e i = {X[1:T ] : j ∈ [1 : p]} denote the collection of
data for outcome unit j of subject i, and let X       ij

time series across all outcome units for subject i. In the motivating application, for example,
Yi(j1 j2 ) corresponds to the true underlying effective connectivity from brain region j1 to j2 for
                  (t)
subject i, and Xij represents the mean BOLD signal at brain region j and time t, obtained from
resting-state fMRI.
    We can consider two distinct perspectives on the derived outcome Y
                                                                     b i . Under the first per-

spective, Y
          b i represents an estimate of Yi , where Yi is treated as a subject-level unknown latent

parameter. In this view, causal effect estimation on Yi remains the inferential goal, given that it
is (asymptotically) equivalent to causal effect estimation on Y
                                                              b i under suitable regularity condi-

tions. Under the second perspective, Y
                                     b i is interpreted as a proxy for the unobservable outcome

Yi . In our settings, Yi is represented through the observed time series X
                                                                         e i . In this case, infer-

ence focuses on testing, rather than estimating, the causal effect on Yi under appropriate causal
assumptions.
    Figure 1 illustrates two different perspectives on using Y
                                                             b for causal inference on Y. In

Figure 1(a), Y
             b is defined as a function of X
                                           e and is closely related to the true, unobserved outcome

Y (denoted by the dashed line), while allowing for confounding between Y and Y
                                                                             b through



                                                      6
               Z           Y       Y
                                   b = f (X)
                                          e                     Z           Y           Y
                                                                                        b



                          W                                          W            X
                                                                                  e

                          (a)                                              (b)

Figure 1: A graphical representation of two approaches for using Y   b in causal inference on Y. In panel
(a), Y
     b is a function of Xe that is closely related to the true, unobserved outcome Y (indicated by the
dashed line); when a standard measure of Y exists, the effect on a unit change in Y can be estimated by
the effect on a unit change in Y.
                               b In panel (b), Y b serves as a proxy for Y, and the units of Y and Yb are
not necessarily comparable; the intervention Z is assumed to affect Y  b through Y and the intermediate
outcome X. e


observed baseline covariates W. This perspective is appropriate when a specific, and presumably
unique, measure of the true outcome Y exists, such that the causal effect corresponding to a unit
change in Y can be approximated by the effect on a unit change in Y.
                                                                  b Figure 1(b) illustrates

the second perspective, in which Y
                                 b is treated as a proxy for the unobservable outcome Y.

This perspective is appropriate when the target outcome Y is an abstract concept that may
be measured in multiple ways, but for which the intervention is expected to affect the proxy Y
                                                                                             b

through Y and the intermediate outcome X.
                                       e Although Y may influence Y
                                                                  b through multiple

pathways, the focus here is on the pathway mediated by the observed time series X.
                                                                                e In this

setting, the units of Y (if such units exist) and Y
                                                  b are not necessarily comparable. Under this

perspective, inference is directed toward testing the existence of a causal effect of Z on Y through
testing for an effect of Z on Y.
                              b We elaborate on the conditions required for each perspective in

Section 2.3.


2.2    Potential outcomes and causal estimands

   We use the potential outcomes framework to define the target estimands and formalize the
causal null hypothesis of interest (Neyman, 1923, Rubin, 1974). For each outcome compo-
nent, let Yi(j1 j2 ) (z) denote the potential outcome under intervention level z ∈ {0, 1}. The vector
Yi (z) = (Yi(1,2) (z), ..., Yi(p,p−1) (z))⊤ includes potential outcomes for subject i across ordered pairs
of outcome units. We examine the difference between the potential outcomes Yi (0) and Yi (1)
using post-intervention time-series data X
                                         e i and the estimated or derived outcomes Y
                                                                                   b i . We intro-

duce analogous potential outcome notation for the observed time series and derived outcomes,



                                                    7
denoting them by X           b i (z), respectively, for z ∈ {0, 1}.
                 e i (z) and Y

    Our focus is on the causal effect of the intervention on individual components of the outcome
Y(j1 j2 ) (j1 , j2 ∈ [1 : p]; j1 ̸= j2 ). These effects can be represented by differences in average
potential outcomes,


                                        τ(j1 j2 ) = Ep [Y(j1 j2 ) (1) − Y(j1 j2 ) (0)],            (1)


where the expectation Ep (·) is taken over subjects in the population.                     Let τ     =
(τ(1,2) , ..., τ(p,p−1) )⊤ = Ep [Y(1)−Y(0)] denote the vector of componentwise causal effects. Because
the true outcomes Yi are not directly observed, inference under either of the two perspectives
described earlier directly targets τ ∗ := Ep [Y(1)
                                              b    − Y(0)],
                                                     b      which is the corresponding causal
estimand defined in terms of the derived outcomes.
    Under the second perspective on Y
                                    b i , the inferential focus shifts from estimation of the causal

effect in (1) to hypothesis testing. Specifically, for j1 , j2 ∈ [1 : p]; j1 ̸= j2 , we consider the
collection of null hypotheses


                                                  H0,(j1 j2 ) : τ(j1 j2 ) = 0.                     (2)


                                                                                           ∗
Similarly, for the derived outcomes we define the corresponding class of null hypotheses {H0,(j1 j2 )
                                                                                                      :
τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) = 0; j1 , j2 ∈ [1 : p]; j1 ̸= j2 }.


2.3      Identification

    In this section, we first establish the causal assumptions required under each perspective and
distinguish those that are common from those that are perspective specific. For z ∈ {0, 1},
i ∈ [1 : n], we impose the following common assumptions.

Assumption 1 (Consistency). If Zi = z ∈ {0, 1}, X
                                                ei = X
                                                     e i (z), Yi = Yi (z), Y
                                                                           bi = Y
                                                                                b i (z).

Assumption 2 (Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA) (Rubin, 1974)). There are
no hidden variations in the intervention and no interference between subjects.

Assumption 3 (Positivity). P r(Zi = z | Wi = w) > 0 for w ∈ ΩW .

Assumption 4 (Ignorability). Z ⊥⊥ X(0),
                                  e     X(1)
                                        e    | W.

                                                                 8
Consistency ensures that the observed time series, the unobservable outcomes, and the derived
outcomes coincide with their respective potential outcome counterparts. The SUTVA assumes
a single version of the intervention and no interference between subjects. The positivity and
ignorability assumptions require sufficient overlap in the propensity scores and unconfounded-
ness of the intervention, conditional on the baseline covariates Wi . Under either perspective,
Y
b i (z) is a function of X
                         e i (z) and Wi . Therefore, Assumption 4 implies unconfoundedness of the

intervention with respect to the potential derived outcomes, that is, Z ⊥⊥ Y(0),
                                                                           b     Y(1)
                                                                                 b    | W.
   Because the outcomes Yi are not directly observed, additional conditions are required to
relate {Yi (1), Yi (0)} to {Y
                            b i (1), Y
                                     b i (0)}. Under the first perspective, where we treat Y
                                                                                           b i as an

estimator of Yi (equivalently, Y
                               b i (z) for Yi (z) for Zi = z under consistency). Then we define the

bias in the subject-level outcome measures by:


               ∆i (z) = (∆i(1,2) (z), ..., ∆i(p,p−1) (z))⊤ = Ei [Y
                                                                 b i (z) | X
                                                                           e i (z), Wi ] − Yi (z),


where Ei [· | X
              e i (z), Wi ] denote the subject-specific expectation given X
                                                                          e i (z) and Wi . The follow-

ing condition restricts the asymptotic behavior of the bias in Y
                                                               b i (z) as the time-series dimension

T increases.

Condition 1 (Asymptotic Unbiasedness). For z ∈ {0, 1},                       max               Ep {∆(j1 j2 ) (z)} = op (1),
                                                                      j1 ,j2 =[1:p]; j1 ̸=j2
as T → ∞.

Condition 1 allows us to treat Y
                               b i as an estimator of Yi and is a key requirement for the identi-

fication result stated in the following theorem.

Theorem 1. Under Assumptions 1–4 and Condition 1, the estimand τ ∗ is consistent for τ as
T → ∞.

   On the other hand, when Y
                           b i is interpreted as a proxy for Yi rather than an estimator, the

following assumptions ensure that hypothesis tests based on the derived outcomes remain valid.

Assumption A1 (Relevance). The unobservable outcomes of interest are associated with the
derived outcomes.

Assumption A2 (Exclusion Restriction). The intervention can affect the derived outcomes Y
                                                                                        b i,

only through the unobservable outcome Yi .

                                                       9
Assumption A3 (Ignorability). Z ⊥⊥ Y(0), Y(1) | W.

Relevance ensures that any intervention on unobservable outcomes is reflected in the derived
outcomes. The exclusion restriction requires that that all effects of the intervention on Y
                                                                                          b operate

through Y, ruling out direct pathways. This assumption is conceptually related to the exclusion
restriction assumptions in identifying latent treatment effects (Stoetzer et al., 2025) and in
instrumental variable models, although in our setting Y
                                                      b serves as a proxy for the intermediate

unobservable Y. Finally, the ignorability assumption requires that, conditional on W, the
intervention is unconfounded with the potential unobservable outcomes.

                                                    ∗
Theorem 2. Under Assumptions 1–4, A1–A3, a test of H0,(j 1 j2 )
                                                                : τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) = 0 provides a valid test
of H0,(j1 j2 ) : τ(j1 j2 ) = 0 for j1 , j2 ∈ [1 : p]; j1 ̸= j2 .

Given these assumptions, Section 3 focuses on obtaining subject-level estimates Y
                                                                                b i from the

time-series data X
                 e i for each subject i. Section 4 then proceeds to across-subject inference to

examine causal effects by combining data from both the intervention and control groups.



3      Deriving multivariate interdependent outcomes

    To distinguish changes in each outcome component that are directly due to the external
intervention from those induced indirectly through its effects on other components, we construct
a derived outcome measure, denoted by Y
                                      b i , from the observed time-series data X
                                                                               e i . In this

section, we omit the subscript i, the subject index, for simplicity.


3.1      Granger causality

    A time series X
                  e ·j is said to Granger-cause another series X
                                                               e ·k if past values of X
                                                                                      e ·j contain

information that improves prediction of the future values of X
                                                             e ·k (Granger, 1969). Although

Granger causality reflects predictive relationships rather than true causation, we use the esti-
mated Granger causality as a derived outcome measure for brain effective connectivity, given
their widespread use in neuroscience. To account for the influence of other brain regions that
may confound the relationship between regions j and k, we employ conditional Granger causality,
which conditions on the time series of additional variables (Geweke, 1984, Liao et al., 2010). This


                                                             10
                               X
                               e ·3 (0)                                         X
                                                                                e ·3 (1)
            Z=0                                              Z=1
                          X
                          e ·1 (0)   X
                                     e ·2 (0)                              X
                                                                           e ·1 (1)   X
                                                                                      e ·2 (1)


                    (a)                                              (b)
Figure 2: Representations of Granger causality relationships under (a) control and (b) intervention,
where the presence of a direct arrow indicates Granger causality between two time series and the arrow
width reflects the strength of that relationship.


approach allows the derived outcomes to better capture directed dependencies between regions
while accounting for the broader multivariate system.
   Figure 2 illustrates the role of conditional Granger causality when examining the causal effect
of an external intervention on pairwise effective connectivity. The figure shows a case where the
effective connectivity measure for one pair, if not carefully constructed, may be influenced by
the intervention’s effects on other pairs in a non-causal way. In Figure 2(a), under control (i.e.,
Z = 0), the time series X
                        e ·3 Granger-causes X
                                            e ·1 . In Figure 2(b), under intervention (i.e., Z = 1),

the strength of this existing Granger causality from X
                                                     e ·3 to X
                                                             e ·1 increases, and an additional

Granger-causal effect from X
                           e ·3 to X
                                   e ·1 emerges. When Granger causality is used as the measure

of effective connectivity, such changes would lead to detected effects on Y(3,1) and Y(3,2) . One
might also detect apparent effects on Y(1,2) or Y(2,1) , even though there is no change in the
Granger-causality relationship between X
                                       e ·1 and X
                                                e ·2 , simply because their relationships with X
                                                                                               e ·3

have changed. This example motivates defining Y
                                              b (j,k) using conditional Granger causality, so
                                                                              e ·h for any h (h ̸= j, k).
that the resulting measure for pair (j, k) is not affected by the time series X

Remark 1. The setting illustrated in Figure 2(b) differs from a standard causal mediation frame-
work (e.g., a causal pathway Z → Y(1,3) → Y(1,2) ) in that the spurious association between X
                                                                                            e ·1

and X
    e ·2 is not necessarily causally induced. Accordingly, the notion of “direct” effect in this

work does not correspond to the effect obtained by blocking an indirect causal path between Z and
Y(1,2) . Instead, it refers to the effect obtained by blocking any paths between Z and Y(1,2) that
operate through other components Y(j,k) with (j, k) ̸= (1, 2).




                                                   11
3.2     Deriving conditional Granger causality

   To derive conditional Granger causality, we employ vector autoregressive (VAR) models with
X
e as input, under the assumption of weak stationarity; that is, the mean and covariance matrix

are time-invariant. To estimate the conditional Granger causality from X
                                                                       e ·j1 to X
                                                                                e ·j2 , we construct

two VAR models of order r for X
                              e ·j2 . The full model includes lagged values of X
                                                                               e ·j1 as predictors,

whereas the reduced model excludes them. To account for the influence of other time series, both
                                                    e ·k for k ∈ J , where J ⊆ [1 : p] \ {j1 , j2 }.
models may additionally adjust for lagged values of X
                             e ·J , and let ℓ = |J | be the number of conditioned time series. The
We denote this collection by X
models may also incorporate baseline covariates W to account for measurement error or other
sources of systematic variation.
   The coefficients in the VAR models are estimated by ordinary least squares under the as-
sumption that the error terms are multivariate normal with mean zero and a time-invariant
covariance matrix. Using the estimated coefficients from the full and reduced models, we con-
struct the following test statistic for the null hypothesis that X
                                                                 e ·j1 does not Granger-cause X
                                                                                              e ·j2

conditioning on X
                e ·J .

                              PT      (t)        PT       ′(t)
                                                                  (       PT       ′(t)
                                                                                               )−1
                                      εj2 )2 −
                               t=r+1 (b                  εj2 )2
                                                  t=r+1 (b                         εj2 )2
                                                                            t=r+1 (b
               Fb(j1 j2 ) =                                                                          ,    (3)
                                             r                        (T − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1

         (t)        ′(t)                                                           (t)
where εbj2 and εbj2 denote the sample residuals from modeling X·j2 in the reduced and full
models, respectively. The test statistic asymptotically follows F -distribution with degrees of
freedom (r, (T − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1). Although the residuals are indexed by t, their variances are
assumed to be time-invariant.
   From the first perspective, illustrated in Figure 1(a), the unobserved outcome Y may be
viewed as the collection of {F(j1 j2 ) : j1 , j2 ∈ [1 : p], j1 ̸= j2 }, where F(j1 j2 ) denotes the population
analogue of Fb(j1 j2 ) obtained by replacing the sample residual sums of squares with their true
population quantities. Then {Fb(j1 j2 ) : j1 , j2 ∈ [1 : p], j1 ̸= j2 } represents the estimator Y
                                                                                                 b for

each subject i. From the second perspective, shown in Figure 1(b), the unobserved outcome Y
implies the underlying effective connectivity, while {Fb(j1 j2 ) : j1 , j2 ∈ [1 : p], j1 ̸= j2 } serves as
the derived outcome vector Y
                           b for each subject i.




                                                        12
3.3     Sample-splitting approach

   In our setting with moderately large p and T , the conditioning sets (e.g., J ) and the VAR
order (e.g., r) may be chosen using a data-driven procedure for each subject. These choices
affect both the null hypothesis and the null distribution of the statistic Fb(j1 j2 ) in (3). If Fb(j1 j2 )
is constructed after selecting J and r using the same data, a selective inference problem arises,
leading to anti-conservative inference.
   To address this issue, we adopt a sample-splitting approach applied to time-series data for
constructing Fb(j1 j2 ) for each subject. For simplicity, suppose that each subject’s time series is
divided into two equal parts: the first half and the second half, with T0 = T /2. Let D1 denote
                          (t)
the first part, D1 := {X·j : j = [1 : p], t = [1 : T0 ]}, which can be used for model selection (i.e.,
                                                                     (t)
selecting J and r). Let D2 denote the second part, D2 := {X·j : j = [1 : p], t = [(T0 + 1) : T ]},
which can be used to compute Fb(j1 j2 ) in (3). Unlike the i.i.d. setting, time-series data must be
split into contiguous time blocks rather than randomly sampled time indices, so that the serial
dependence structure learned from D1 can be validly applied to D2 .
   Let Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                          b 1 ) denote the statistic in (3), computed using D2 under the model
              b 1 ) selected from D1 . Next, we establish the asymptotic validity of this sample-
specification m(D
splitting procedure for Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                           b 1 ), even when D1 and D2 are statistially dependent.

Definition 1 (Asymptotic validity of sample-splitting (Lunde, 2019)). Let D
                                                                          e2 denote an inde-

pendent copy of D2 that is also independent of D1 . The sample-splitting is said to be asymp-
totically valid in probability under a metric d(·, ·) measuring the distance between conditional
distributions (e.g., bounded Lipschitz metric) if

                                                                      
                                                                         p
               d L(F(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                   b                 b 1 )), L(F(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                               b          e      b 1 )) −→ 0 as T → ∞,


where L(·) denotes the distribution of a random variable.

   Sufficient conditions for asymptotic validity of the sample-splitting procedure include (i)
tightness and (ii) asymptotic deletion stability (Lunde, 2019). For (i), under the null hypothesis,
Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                   b 1 ) converges in distribution to F (r, (T − T0 − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1) as T → ∞.
Convergence to a non-degenerate limit implies asymptotic tightness; that is, for any δ > 0, there
exists a compact interval such that the probability that Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                                                            b 1 ) lies outside this

                                                    13
interval is smaller than δ.
    For (ii), we formalize asymptotic deletion stability for the proposed outcome measures
Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                   b 1 ) as follows.

Definition 2 (Asymptotic deletion stability). Assume that T − T0 → ∞. Suppose that there
exists a sequence LT −T0 such that LT −T0 → ∞ and T −T0 −LT −T0 → ∞. Let D2′ denote a version
of D2 with its first LT −T0 observations removed. Consider an estimator θ̂ | m for each m ∈ M∗ ,
where |M∗ | < ∞ and P r(m(D
                        b 1 ) ∈ M∗ ) → 1. The estimator θ̂ | m
                                                             b is said to be asymptotically
deletion stable if
                                                                   p
                                    b 2 ) | m(D
                                    θ(D             b ′ ) | m(D
                                            b 1 ) − θ(D     b 1 ) −→ 0.
                                                        2


The following theorem shows that, under suitable regularity conditions, the proposed outcome
measure for effective connectivity satisfies asymptotic deletion stability, ensuring that the corre-
sponding sample-splitting approach is asymptotically valid.

Theorem 3. Consider the setting of Definition 2. Under the null hypothesis that X
                                                                                e ·j1 does not

Granger-cause X
              e ·j2 conditioning on X
                                    e ·J , suppose that


                                      (T − T0 − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1
                              lim                                      = 1.
                             T →∞ (T − T0 − LT −T0 − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1



Then
                                                                                   p
                                                b 1 ) − Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2′ ) | m(D
                             Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D                         b 1 ) −→ 0.

Together with tightness, this implies that Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                                              b 1 ) provides an asymptotically valid
sample-splitting procedure.

    The proposed sample-splitting approach is particularly useful for time-series settings in which
the derived variables represent relational outcomes among interconnected units and must be
learned from longitudinal data. As the weak stationarity assumption is the key to establishing
asymptotic validity, the time-series data used should consist entirely of either pre-intervention
or post-intervention periods, so that the series is not disrupted by the intervention.




                                                        14
4       Causal inference with derived multivariate outcomes

      With the derived outcomes Y
                                b i , we now consider inference for the intervention effect on them.

We focus on (i) addressing confounding due to covariates Wi under the ignorability assumption
(Assumptions 4 and A3), and (ii) accounting for the multiple testing problem when testing
intervention effects across multiple pairs of (j1 , j2 ) in (1) or (2).


4.1      Treatment effect estimation for derived outcomes

      We first aim to estimate each component of τ ∗ = Ep [Y(1)
                                                           b    − Y(0)];
                                                                  b      in particular, τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) =
Ep [Yb(j1 j2 ) (1) − Yb(j1 j2 ) (0)]. To address confounding between Z and Y
                                                                           b under Assumption 4, we

construct an inverse probability weighting (IPW) estimator. One could alternatively consider
an augmented IPW estimator that incorporates an outcome regression model to improve robust-
ness to model misspecification. However, with multivariate outcomes exhibiting within-variable
                                       b | Z, W) is nontrivial. We therefore focus on the IPW
dependence, specifying a model for Ep (Y
estimator.
      With the propensity score defined as e(Wi ) := P r(Z = 1 | Wi ), the IPW estimator for τ(j∗ 1 j2 )
is:                                                      (                                              )
                                                    n
                                            1X                    Zi Ybi(j1 j2 ) (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )
                             τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) =                                     −                           .   (4)
                                            n i=1                  eb(Wi )         1 − eb(Wi )

Under Assumptions 1–4 and a correctly specified propensity score model, it is straightforward to
show that τb∗ is a consistent estimator of τ ∗ . Deriving its asymptotic variance and establishing
a normal approximation requires additional care, however, because the components of τb∗ are
generally correlated.
      Consider a parametric model for the propensity score of the form of e(Xi ) = σ(Wi⊤ β), where
σ(·) is a known smooth link function. Let βb denote the maximum likelihood estimator of β, and
define eb(Wi ) = σ(Wi⊤ β).
                       b Write ηi = W⊤ β, and let σ ′ = σ ′ (ηi ) denote the derivative of σ(ηi ).
                                     i             i

Under regularity conditions, τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) has the following asymptotically linear representation,

                                                                             n
                         √                                          1 X
                                 τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) − τ(j∗ 1 j2 )                hi(j1 j2 ) + o(n−1/2 ),
                                                              
                             n                                    =√                                            (5)
                                                                     n i=1




                                                                        15
where hi(j1 j2 ) is the influence function of τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) . Specifically,


              Zi Ybi(j1 j2 ) (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )
   hi(j1 j2 ) =              −                      − τ(j∗ 1 j2 )
                   σ                     1 − σi
              " ni                                                                   #
                                             ′                            ′
                                                                                                              σi′
                                                                                
               1   X                       σ                            σ           ⊤     −1
            −               Zi Ybi(j1 j2 ) 2i + (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )      i
                                                                                  W i   Iβ   (Zi − σ i )              Wi ,
               n i=1                      σi                         (1 − σi )2                          σi (1 − σi )

where Iβ denotes the Fisher information matrix for β.
    Compared to the derivations in Qiu et al. (2024), in which the proposed IPW estimator based
on the derived multivariate outcomes Y
                                     b targets the estimand defined in terms of the potential

outcomes of the unobserved outcome Y (i.e., τ ), our inference targets instead the estimand
                                                               b i (i.e., τ ∗ ). Moreover, the link
defined in terms of potential outcomes of the derived outcomes Y
function σ(·) can be any known smooth mapping from Wi⊤ β to (0, 1), and need not be restricted
to the logistic link. Under such general setting, we establish the asymptotic normality of τb∗ in
the following theorem.

Theorem 4. Suppose that the propensity score model is correctly specified and Assumptions 1–4
hold. If V(j1 j2 ) := E( n1 ni=1 h2i(j1 j2 ) ) < ∞, then
                           P


                                 √                           d
                                       τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) − τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) ) −→ N (0, V(j1 j2 ) ) as n → ∞.
                                     n(b


                                                  b(j j ) , can be derived by 1 Pn b
An analytic estimator of the asymptotic variance, V                                   2
                                                     1 2                      n  i=1 hi(j1 j2 ) , where

hi(j1 j2 ) is obtained by replacing β with βb in hi(j1 j2 ) .
b

Corollary 1. Under the conditions of Theorem 4, V
                                                b(j j ) is a consistent estimator of V(j j ) .
                                                   1 2                                  1 2



In practice, we restrict attention to components (j1 , j2 ) such that V
                                                                      b(j j ) > c for some small
                                                                         1 2


constant c > 0, thereby excluding components associated with degenerate limiting distributions.
    Under the additional condition below, the estimator τb(j1 j2 ) may be interchangeably with
τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) when the derived outcomes are asymptotically unbiased for the unobserved outcomes
(Condition 1).

                                                                                           Ep ∆(j1 j2 ) (z) = op (n−1/2 ), where
                                                                                                          
Condition 2. For z ∈ {0, 1}, as T, n → ∞,                                max
                                                                  j1 ,j2 =[1:p]; j1 ̸=j2
∆i(j1 j2 ) (z) = Ei [Ybi(j1 j2 ) (z) | X
                                       e i (z), Wi ] − Yi(j j ) (z).
                                                           1 2

                            √                    p
Under Condition 2,              n(τ ∗ − τ ) → 0 when T, n → ∞, and the following result follows by
Slutsky’s Theorem.

                                                                 16
                                                                                            √
Corollary 2. Under the assumptions in Theorem 4 and Condition 2, as T, n → ∞,                     τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) −
                                                                                                n(b
          d
τ(j1 j2 ) ) → N (0, V(j1 j2 ) ).

The proposed outcome measure, Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                                 b 1 ), is an asymptotically unbiased estimator of
F(j1 j2 ) , satisfying Condition 1 provided that (T − T0 ) > r(p + 2). Condition 2 may require a
larger T for each subject. Even when it is not satisfied, τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) remains a valid test statistic for
the hypotheses in (2) under Assumptions 1–4, and A1–A3, as established in Theorem 2.


4.2       Simultaneous inference

    When inference concerns multiple components in τ or τ ∗ , dependence among the estimator
 τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) } induced by within-outcome correlations and the use of shared estimated propensity
{b
scores must be properly accounted for. Valid simultaneous inference therefore requires multiple
testing procedures that control error rates such as family-wise error rate (FWER) and/or the
false discovery proportion (FDP). In Sections 5 and 6, we employ a step-down procedure with
augmentation that controls FDP exceedance rate. This approach is introduced by Genovese and
Wasserman (2006) and recently combined with a Gaussian multiplier bootstrap by Qiu et al.
(2024). Further details are provided in Supplementary Material Section A3.



5       Simulation studies

    In this section, we present results of simulation studies conducted to assess the validity and
effectiveness of the proposed method. We generate the data for n = 100 subjects. For each
subject i = [1 : n], a vector of baseline covariates Wi ∈ Rq , with q = 5, is generated from
a multivariate normal distribution. The intervention indicator Zi is then generated according
to P r(Zi = 1 | Wi ) = logit(Wi⊤ β), where β = (0.7, −0.8, 0.5, 0.3, −0.3)⊤ . For each subject i,
                                                  e i (z), z ∈ {0, 1}, of length T = 1000 and
we generate two potential outcomes of time series X
p ∈ {21, 51} from a VAR(1) model. The transition matrix describing the linear dependencies
among the time series is partitioned into 3×3 blocks of equal size, each of dimension p/3. Within
each diagonal block, the autoregressive coefficients are sampled from Unif(0.72, 0.85), while the
off-diagonal coefficients within the blocks are generated more sparsely from Unif(0.03, 0.08) with
random signs. The intervention effect is introduced through the between-block autoregressive co-


                                                   17
efficients. Specifically, when Zi = 1, a subset of these coefficients is set to values with magnitude
δ ∈ {0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.10}, whereas when Zi = 0, all between-block coefficients are set to
zero (i.e., δ = 0). The parameter δ therefore controls the strength of the intervention effect. In
addition, baseline covariates Wi influence the baseline connectivity structure by modifying the
transition matrices. These structural patterns are held fixed across subjects across Monte Carlo
replications.
   Using simulated data, effective connectivity is derived using the proposed sample-splitting
procedure, intervention effects are estimated using the IPW estimator in (4), and simultaneous
inference is conducted. Hypothesis testing of the null hypothesis in (2) is performed at the
α=0.05 level. The step-down procedure with augmentation targets control of the false discovery
exceedance probability, FDPex := P r(FDP > 0.1) ≤ α. We compare the performance of four
alternative methods: (i) the proposed sample-splitting approach and the IPW estimator with
a correctly specified propensity score model; (ii) the proposed sample-splitting approach with
an incorrect propensity score model; (iii) no sample splitting, using the second half of the data
for both model selection and estimation, with a correctly specified propensity score model; and
(iv) no sample splitting with an incorrectly specified propensity score model. For each method,
we evaluate FWER and average bias under the global null (δ = 0). Under alternative scenarios
(δ > 0), we report power, FDP, and FDPex, averaged over 1000 Monte Carlo replications.
   Figure 3 summarizes the simulation results for n = 100. When p = 21, the proposed method
maintains valid control of the FWER near the nominal 5% level and exhibits increasing power
as δ increases, while controlling the FDP and the FDPex. In contrast, methods based on an
incorrectly specified propensity score model exhibit inflated FWER and elevated false discoveries
due to biased effect estimation and underestimation of variance. The error rates are further
inflated when p = 51, as the number of direction components increase exponentially compared
to p = 21. Method (iii) performs comparably to the proposed method in FWER, power, FDP
and FDPex, which may suggest that sample splitting offers little benefit in this setting. However,
similar results likely reflects the limited degree of overfitting in our data-generating mechanism,
which is based on relatively simple VAR models. In more complex settings with complicated
confounding structures among outcome units, overfitting is expected to be more pronounced,
making sample splitting necessary to ensure valid inference. Overall, the proposed method



                                                 18
            (a)           FWER (δ = 0)

                                                        p = 21                                                                    p = 51

                   60%
           FWER
                   40%


                   20%


                    0%
                                    (i)          (ii)              (iii)           (iv)                       (i)          (ii)            (iii)          (iv)
                                                                                            Method

            (b)           Power (δ > 0)

                                                        p = 21                                                                    p = 51
                   100%

                   75%
           Power




                   50%

                   25%

                    0%

                             0.02         0.04          0.06               0.08   0.10                 0.02         0.04          0.06             0.08   0.10
                                                                                               δ

            (c)           FDP (δ > 0)

                                                        p = 21                                                                    p = 51

                   60%


                   40%
           FDP




                   20%


                    0%

                             0.02         0.04          0.06               0.08   0.10                 0.02         0.04          0.06             0.08   0.10
                                                                                               δ

            (d)           FDPex (δ > 0)

                                                        p = 21                                                                    p = 51
                   100%


                   75%
           FDPex




                   50%


                   25%


                    0%

                             0.02         0.04          0.06               0.08   0.10                 0.02         0.04          0.06             0.08   0.10
                                                                                               δ

                                                               (i) Sample splitting and correctly specified propensity score (proposed)
                                                               (ii) Sample splitting and incorrectly specified propensity score
                                             Method
                                                               (iii) Without sample splitting and correctly specified propensity score
                                                               (iv) Without sample splitting and incorrectly specified propensity score



Figure 3: Simulation results when the number of subjects n = 100. Panel (a) shows the FWER under
the global null; panel (b) shows power under alternatives with varying intervention intensities (δ); panels
(c) and (d) show the FDP and FDPex, respectively, across different values of δ.


demonstrates valid type-I error control under the global null and improved power as the effect
size increases. Additional results for larger sample size (n = 200) are provided in Supplementary
Material Section A4.




                                                                                          19
6     Investigation of the causal effect of amyloid elevation

      on effective connectivity in Alzheimer’s Disease

    We apply the proposed framework to examine the effect of amyloid burden, evaluated using
amyloid PET imaging, on measures of brain effective connectivity. Our study population is re-
stricted to participants in the non-dementia ADNI research groups at entry, including cognitively
normal (CN), significant memory concern (SMC), early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), and
mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Accordingly, both the amyloid-positive and amyloid-negative
groups exclude dementia participants, whose effective connectivity patterns may differ substan-
tially related to dementia processes. For each subject, resting-state fMRI data are preprocessed
and registered to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) 152 T1 2mm standard template
space. We compute region-specific mean time series using the AAL2 atlas (Rolls et al., 2015),
resulting in p =120 time series corresponding to predefined ROIs. Additional preprocessing
details are provided in Supplementary Material Section A5.
                                              Estimated average causal effects on each pair of ROIs
                          Precentral_L
                          Precentral_R
                     Frontal_Sup_2_L
                     Frontal_Sup_2_R
                      Frontal_Mid_2_L
                     Frontal_Mid_2_R
                   Frontal_Inf_Oper_L
                  Frontal_Inf_Oper_R
                      Frontal_Inf_Tri_L
                     Frontal_Inf_Tri_R
                 Frontal_Inf_Orb_2_L
                 Frontal_Inf_Orb_2_R
                     Rolandic_Oper_L
                    Rolandic_Oper_R
                 Supp_Motor_Area_L
                 Supp_Motor_Area_R
                            Olfactory_L
                           Olfactory_R
               Frontal_Sup_Medial_L
               Frontal_Sup_Medial_R
                  Frontal_Med_Orb_L
                 Frontal_Med_Orb_R
                              Rectus_L
                              Rectus_R
                            OFCmed_L
                           OFCmed_R
                             OFCant_L
                             OFCant_R
                            OFCpost_L
                           OFCpost_R
                              OFClat_L
                             OFClat_R
                                Insula_L
                               Insula_R
                      Cingulate_Ant_L
                     Cingulate_Ant_R
                      Cingulate_Mid_L
                     Cingulate_Mid_R
                     Cingulate_Post_L
                    Cingulate_Post_R
                      Hippocampus_L
                      Hippocampus_R
                  ParaHippocampal_L
                 ParaHippocampal_R
                           Amygdala_L
                          Amygdala_R
                           Calcarine_L
                           Calcarine_R
                             Cuneus_L
                             Cuneus_R
                              Lingual_L
                             Lingual_R
                      Occipital_Sup_L
                      Occipital_Sup_R
                       Occipital_Mid_L
                      Occipital_Mid_R
                        Occipital_Inf_L
                        Occipital_Inf_R
                            Fusiform_L
                            Fusiform_R
                         Postcentral_L
                         Postcentral_R
                       Parietal_Sup_L
                       Parietal_Sup_R
                         Parietal_Inf_L
                         Parietal_Inf_R
                     SupraMarginal_L
                     SupraMarginal_R
                             Angular_L
                             Angular_R
                          Precuneus_L
                         Precuneus_R
                Paracentral_Lobule_L
                Paracentral_Lobule_R
                            Caudate_L
                            Caudate_R
                            Putamen_L
                           Putamen_R
                            Pallidum_L
                            Pallidum_R
                           Thalamus_L
                          Thalamus_R
                              Heschl_L
                              Heschl_R
                     Temporal_Sup_L
                     Temporal_Sup_R
               Temporal_Pole_Sup_L
               Temporal_Pole_Sup_R
                      Temporal_Mid_L
                     Temporal_Mid_R
                Temporal_Pole_Mid_L
               Temporal_Pole_Mid_R
                       Temporal_Inf_L
                       Temporal_Inf_R
                 Cerebelum_Crus1_L
                 Cerebelum_Crus1_R
                 Cerebelum_Crus2_L
                 Cerebelum_Crus2_R
                       Cerebelum_3_L
                      Cerebelum_3_R
                    Cerebelum_4_5_L
                   Cerebelum_4_5_R
                       Cerebelum_6_L
                      Cerebelum_6_R
                     Cerebelum_7b_L
                     Cerebelum_7b_R
                       Cerebelum_8_L
                      Cerebelum_8_R
                       Cerebelum_9_L
                      Cerebelum_9_R
                     Cerebelum_10_L
                     Cerebelum_10_R
                           Vermis_1_2
                              Vermis_3
                           Vermis_4_5
                              Vermis_6
                              Vermis_7
                              Vermis_8
                              Vermis_9
                             Vermis_10
                                                      Precentral_L
                                                      Precentral_R
                                                 Frontal_Sup_2_L
                                                 Frontal_Sup_2_R
                                                  Frontal_Mid_2_L
                                                 Frontal_Mid_2_R
                                               Frontal_Inf_Oper_L
                                              Frontal_Inf_Oper_R
                                                  Frontal_Inf_Tri_L
                                                 Frontal_Inf_Tri_R
                                             Frontal_Inf_Orb_2_L
                                             Frontal_Inf_Orb_2_R
                                                 Rolandic_Oper_L
                                                Rolandic_Oper_R
                                             Supp_Motor_Area_L
                                             Supp_Motor_Area_R
                                                        Olfactory_L
                                                       Olfactory_R
                                           Frontal_Sup_Medial_L
                                           Frontal_Sup_Medial_R
                                              Frontal_Med_Orb_L
                                             Frontal_Med_Orb_R
                                                          Rectus_L
                                                          Rectus_R
                                                        OFCmed_L
                                                       OFCmed_R
                                                         OFCant_L
                                                         OFCant_R
                                                        OFCpost_L
                                                       OFCpost_R
                                                          OFClat_L
                                                         OFClat_R
                                                            Insula_L
                                                           Insula_R
                                                  Cingulate_Ant_L
                                                 Cingulate_Ant_R
                                                  Cingulate_Mid_L
                                                 Cingulate_Mid_R
                                                 Cingulate_Post_L
                                                Cingulate_Post_R
                                                  Hippocampus_L
                                                  Hippocampus_R
                                              ParaHippocampal_L
                                             ParaHippocampal_R
                                                       Amygdala_L
                                                      Amygdala_R
                                                       Calcarine_L
                                                       Calcarine_R
                                                         Cuneus_L
                                                         Cuneus_R
                                                          Lingual_L
                                                         Lingual_R
                                                  Occipital_Sup_L
                                                  Occipital_Sup_R
                                                   Occipital_Mid_L
                                                  Occipital_Mid_R
                                                    Occipital_Inf_L
                                                    Occipital_Inf_R
                                                        Fusiform_L
                                                        Fusiform_R
                                                     Postcentral_L
                                                     Postcentral_R
                                                   Parietal_Sup_L
                                                   Parietal_Sup_R
                                                     Parietal_Inf_L
                                                     Parietal_Inf_R
                                                 SupraMarginal_L
                                                 SupraMarginal_R
                                                         Angular_L
                                                         Angular_R
                                                      Precuneus_L
                                                     Precuneus_R
                                            Paracentral_Lobule_L
                                            Paracentral_Lobule_R
                                                        Caudate_L
                                                        Caudate_R
                                                        Putamen_L
                                                       Putamen_R
                                                        Pallidum_L
                                                        Pallidum_R
                                                       Thalamus_L
                                                      Thalamus_R
                                                          Heschl_L
                                                          Heschl_R
                                                 Temporal_Sup_L
                                                 Temporal_Sup_R
                                           Temporal_Pole_Sup_L
                                           Temporal_Pole_Sup_R
                                                  Temporal_Mid_L
                                                 Temporal_Mid_R
                                            Temporal_Pole_Mid_L
                                           Temporal_Pole_Mid_R
                                                   Temporal_Inf_L
                                                   Temporal_Inf_R
                                             Cerebelum_Crus1_L
                                             Cerebelum_Crus1_R
                                             Cerebelum_Crus2_L
                                             Cerebelum_Crus2_R
                                                   Cerebelum_3_L
                                                  Cerebelum_3_R
                                                Cerebelum_4_5_L
                                               Cerebelum_4_5_R
                                                   Cerebelum_6_L
                                                  Cerebelum_6_R
                                                 Cerebelum_7b_L
                                                 Cerebelum_7b_R
                                                   Cerebelum_8_L
                                                  Cerebelum_8_R
                                                   Cerebelum_9_L
                                                  Cerebelum_9_R
                                                 Cerebelum_10_L
                                                 Cerebelum_10_R
                                                       Vermis_1_2
                                                          Vermis_3
                                                       Vermis_4_5
                                                          Vermis_6
                                                          Vermis_7
                                                          Vermis_8
                                                          Vermis_9
                                                         Vermis_10




                                                                      Estimated effect sizes
                                                                     −20 −10 0   10 20 30




Figure 4: A heat map visualizing the full matrix of estimated causal effects of amyloid positivity on
effective connectivity across pairs of ROIs (p = 120).


                                                                        20
    Among the n = 81 subjects, 37 (45.7%) are amyloid positive. The amyloid-positive and
amyloid-negative groups do not differ significantly with respect to sex (40.5% vs. 36.4% male,
p = 0.876) or years of education (16.22 ± 2.45 vs. 16.36 ± 2.72 years; p = 0.659). However,
subjects in the amyloid-positive group are older on average than those in the amyloid-negative
group (81.41 ± 7.74 vs 74.66 ± 7.77 years; p < 0.001), and the prevalence of APOE ε4 carrier
status is higher among amyloid-positive subjects (54.1% vs. 27.3%; p = 0.026). Figure 4
displays the estimated average effects across all outcome unit pairs of effective connectivity.
Most estimated effects are close to zero, with a greater proportion taking negative values than
positive values. After applying the multiple testing procedure, only a single directed effective
connectivity from the left anterior cingulate cortex to the left middle occipital region remains
statistically significant, with an estimated effect of −3.33 (simultaneous 95% CI : [−6.50, −0.16]).
Overall, these results provide limited evidence for a global reduction in effective connectivity
due to elevated amyloid burden. The finding may reflect limitations of resting-state fMRI data,
including relatively low resolution and measurement noise.



7     Discussion

    The proposed framework for causal inference with derived outcomes from time-series data
is broadly applicable in settings where the outcome of interest represents relationships between
units, such as friendship, collaboration, or biological interaction, and is typically inferred from
longitudinal observations. The methodology is particularly relevant when the primary research
goal is to examine the causal effect of an external intervention on individuals or selected com-
ponents of these relationship measures, rather than to study causal mechanisms among the
relationships themselves, and when the outcomes are derived using well-established models that
are widely adopted in the relevant scientific domains (e.g., VARs). A key principle underlying
our approach is that models used to construct relational outcomes should appropriately account
for, and condition on, others’ observed historical information when the inferential target is the
intervention effect on one or more components of the derived outcomes. Specifically, by deriving
outcome measures that condition on other time series, the proposed framework mitigates spuri-
ous associations between the intervention and individual outcome components, thereby enabling
more interpretable and valid downstream causal inference.

                                                21
   However, the proposed framework has several limitations that point to meaningful direc-
tions for future research. First, the selection of conditioning time series currently relies on data
from both intervention groups. Future work could develop procedures that define conditioning
sets using only pre-intervention data, thus ensuring a clear separation between outcome con-
struction and causal estimation. Second, the proposed variance estimator does not explicitly
account for the additional variability introduced by the sample-splitting procedure, although we
acknowledge discrepancies between τb∗ and τb, as well as between their corresponding variance
estimators. Finally, our current implementation focuses on linear, weakly stationary time-series
models, which are commonly used in connectivity analyses. While the use of widely adopted
connectivity measures facilitates integration with existing practice, future work could investi-
gate extensions to more flexible and general time-series-based measures with a principled causal
inference framework.



Acknowledgments

   Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neu-
roimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD
ADNI (Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the
National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineer-
ing, and through generous contributions from the following: AbbVie, Alzheimer’s Association;
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen; Bristol-
Myers Squibb Company; CereSpir, Inc.; Cogstate; Eisai Inc.; Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli
Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company Genen-
tech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research
& Development, LLC.; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development LLC.;
Lumosity; Lundbeck; Merck & Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research;
Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal Imaging;
Servier; Takeda Pharmaceutical Company; and Transition Therapeutics. The Canadian Insti-
tutes of Health Research is providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Pri-
vate sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health
(www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and

                                                22
Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute at
the University of Southern California. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro
Imaging at the University of Southern California.



Funding

   This research was supported by Grant Number 5P20GM103645 from the National Institute
of General Medical Sciences and Grant Number R01AG075511 from the National Institute on
Aging.



References

Alzheimer’s Association (2025). 2025 alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s & De-
  mentia 21 (5), e70235.

Du, J.-H., Z. Zeng, E. H. Kennedy, L. Wasserman, and K. Roeder (2025). Causal inference
  for genomic data with multiple heterogeneous outcomes. Journal of the American Statistical
  Association 120 (552), 2484–2497.

Friston, K. J. (1994). Functional and effective connectivity in neuroimaging: A synthesis. Human
  Brain Mapping 2 (1-2), 56–78.

Genovese, C. R. and L. Wasserman (2006). Exceedance control of the false discovery proportion.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association 101 (476), 1408–1417.

Geweke, J. F. (1984). Measures of Conditional Linear Dependence and Feedback Between Time
  Series. Journal of the American Statistical Association 79 (388), 907–915.

Gilbert, J. B. (2025). How measurement affects causal inference: Attenuation bias is (usually)
  more important than outcome scoring weights. Methodology 21 (2), 91–122.

Granger, C. W. J. (1969). Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-
  spectral Methods. Econometrica 37 (3), 424–438.

Knox, D., C. Lucas, and W. K. T. Cho (2022). Testing causal theories with learned proxies.
  Annual Review of Political Science 25 (1), 419–441.

                                              23
Kuchibhotla, A. K., J. E. Kolassa, and T. A. Kuffner (2022). Post-Selection Inference. Annual
  Review of Statistics and Its Application 9 (1), 505–527.

Liao, W., D. Mantini, Z. Zhang, Z. Pan, J. Ding, Q. Gong, Y. Yang, and H. Chen (2010). Eval-
  uating the effective connectivity of resting state networks using conditional Granger causality.
  Biological Cybernetics 102 (1), 57–69.

Lozano, A. C., N. Abe, Y. Liu, and S. Rosset (2009). Grouped graphical granger modeling for
  gene expression regulatory networks discovery. Bioinformatics 25 (12), i110–i118.

Lunde, R. (2019). Sample splitting and weak assumption inference for time series. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.07425 .

Modarressi, I., J. Spiess, and A. Venugopal (2025). Causal inference on outcomes learned from
  text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00725 .

Moffat, G., P. Zhukovsky, G. Coughlan, and A. N. Voineskos (2022). Unravelling the relationship
  between amyloid accumulation and brain network function in normal aging and very mild
  cognitive decline: a longitudinal analysis. Brain Communications 4 (6), fcac282.

Neyman, J. (1923). On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments. essay
  on principles. Ann. Agricultural Sciences, 1–51.

Palmqvist, S., M. Schöll, O. Strandberg, N. Mattsson, E. Stomrud, H. Zetterberg, K. Blennow,
  S. Landau, W. Jagust, and O. Hansson (2017). Earliest accumulation of β-amyloid occurs
  within the default-mode network and concurrently affects brain connectivity. Nature commu-
  nications 8 (1), 1214.

Qiu, Y., J. Sun, and X.-H. Zhou (2024). Unveiling the Unobservable: Causal Inference on
  Multiple Derived Outcomes. Journal of the American Statistical Association 119 (547), 2178–
  2189.

Rolls, E. T., M. Joliot, and N. Tzourio-Mazoyer (2015). Implementation of a new parcellation
  of the orbitofrontal cortex in the automated anatomical labeling atlas. NeuroImage 122, 1–5.

Rubin, D. B. (1974). Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized
  studies. Journal of educational Psychology 66 (5), 688.

                                               24
Stephan, K. E. and K. J. Friston (2010). Analyzing effective connectivity with functional mag-
  netic resonance imaging. WIREs Cognitive Science 1 (3), 446–459.

Stoetzer, L. F., X. Zhou, and M. Steenbergen (2025). Causal inference with latent outcomes.
  American Journal of Political Science 69 (2), 624–640.

Tang, W., S. L. Bressler, C. M. Sylvester, G. L. Shulman, and M. Corbetta (2012). Measuring
  granger causality between cortical regions from voxelwise fmri bold signals with lasso. PLoS
  computational biology 8 (5), e1002513.

Tibshirani, R. J., J. Taylor, R. Lockhart, and R. Tibshirani (2016). Exact Post-Selection In-
  ference for Sequential Regression Procedures. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
  tion 111 (514), 600–620.

VanderWeele, T. J. (2022). Constructed measures and causal inference: Towards a new model
  of measurement for psychosocial constructs. Epidemiology 33 (1), 141–151.

Xi, Z., X. Zhuang, and H. Chen (2022). Post-selection Inference with Application to Autoregres-
  sive Processes. In 2021 International Conference on Mechanical, Aerospace and Automotive
  Engineering, CMAAE 2021, New York, NY, USA, pp. 244–249. Association for Computing
  Machinery.

Zhou, Z., Y. Chen, M. Ding, P. Wright, Z. Lu, and Y. Liu (2009). Analyzing brain networks
  with pca and conditional granger causality. Human brain mapping 30 (7), 2197–2206.




                                              25
                                      Supplementary materials


A1       Details of conditional Granger causality models

   The effective connectivity outcome measures are constructed separately for each subject. We
therefore suppress the subject index i throughout this section for notational simplicity.
          (t)
   Let X·J denote the length-ℓ vector of time series corresponding to outcome units (e.g., brain
                                                                                                 (t)   (t)
regions) in the index set J at time t. The reduced VAR system for X·j2 , conditional on X·J for
t = [(r + 1) : T ], can be represented as follows:

                                                                                       
                                 (t)               r          (t−k)                (t)
                               X·j2        (t)
                                                   X        X·j2               εj 2 
                                         =C +           Ak             +               ,          (A1)
                                    (t)                           (t−k)              (t)
                                   X·J             k=1           X·J                εJ


where C(t) is a vector of length of l + 1 that includes an intercept, and Ak are the (l + 1) × (l + 1)
                                                                              (t)     (t)
transition matrices for lag k = [1 : r]. The vector ε(t) = (εj2 , (εJ )⊤ )⊤ includes the error terms
at time t, which satisfies E(ε(t) ) = 0. Let Σ denote the (l + 1) × (l + 1) covariance matrix of ε(t)
for t = [(r + 1) : T ]. This matrix can be partitioned as

                                                                                                
                                                                 (t)                (t)      (t)
                                                 var(ε )        cov(ε                    , εJ )
                        Σ = E(ε(t) (ε(t) )⊤ ) =                             
                                                       (t) (t)          (t)
                                                  cov(εJ , εj2 )   var(εJ ).

                                (t)       (t)   (t)
   The full model for X·j1 , X·j2 and X·J can be written as

                                                                 
                             (t)                     (t−k)      ′ (t)
                           X·j1          r      X·j1   ε j1 
                                          X
                           X  = C′(t) +     A′k 
                            (t)                  (t−k)   (t) 
                                                             ′ 
                            ·j2                 X·j2  +  ε j2  .                                  (A2)
                                        k=1                      
                              (t)                    (t−k)      ′ (t)
                             X·J                    X·J        εJ


Here, C′(t) is a vector of length of l + 2 that includes an intercept, and A′k are the (l + 2) × (l + 2)
transition matrices for lags k = [1 : r] in the full VAR system. The error terms at time t is
          ′(t)   ′(t)   ′(t)
ε′(t) = (εj1 , εj2 , (εJ )⊤ )⊤ , which satisfies E(ε′(t) ) = 0. Let Σ′ denote the (l + 2) × (l + 2)




                                                            1
covariance matrix of ε′(t) for t = [(r + 1) : T ], which can be partitioned as

                                                                                           
                                                 ′(t)            ′(t) ′(t)           ′(t)  ′(t)
                                           var(εj1 )       cov(εj1 , εj2 )     cov(εj1 , εJ )
             ′       ′(t)    ′(t) ⊤
                                           ′(t) ′(t)           ′(t)         ′(t)     ′(t) 
                                                                                            
           Σ = E(ε          (ε   ) )=
                                      cov(εj2   , εj1 ) var(ε  j2   ) cov(ε j2   , ε J  )
                                                                                           
                                             ′(t) ′(t)      ′(t) ′(t)            ′(t)
                                       cov(εJ , εj1 ) cov(εJ , εj2 )     var(εJ ).


   Under the following two assumptions, the parameters of each equation in the VAR system
in (A1) and (A2) can be estimated by ordinary least squares. For resting-state fMRI data, the
weak-stationarity assumption is commonly adopted and is often reasonable after appropriate
preprocessing.

Assumption B1. The error terms in the VAR models are Gaussian with time-invariant covari-
ance matrices.

  (i) Multivariate normality: The error terms satisfy ε(t) ∼ M V Nl+1 (0, Σ) and ε′(t) ∼
      M V Nl+2 (0, Σ′ ).

 (ii) Noises serial correlation: The covariance matrices Σ and Σ′ do not depend on t.
                                                                     (t)      (t)                 (t)
Assumption B2 (Weak Stationarity). The time series X·j1 , X·j2 , and each series in X·J are
weakly stationary. That is, each has constant mean and finite second moment, and the autoco-
variance function depend only on lag.



A2       Lemmas and Proofs

Lemma 1 (Tightness). For conditional Granger causality, the test statistic is an F-statistic .
Let Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                       b 1 ) denote the estimator of this statistic computed from D2 (with time length
T − T0 ), conditional on the model fitted on D1 . Under the null hypothesis that X
                                                                                 e ·j1 does not

Granger-cause X
              e ·j2 conditioning on X
                                    e ·J ,


                   Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                      b 1 ) ∼ F (r, (T − T0 − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1).


                                                                 d
                                                           b 1 ) → χ2r /r, under the null hypothesis.
Since r and ℓ are fixed, as T − T0 → ∞, Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D

Because convergence in distribution to a non-degenerate limit implies tightness, the sequence of
conditional Granger causality estimators is tight. That is, for any δ > 0, there exists a compact

                                                        2
interval such that the probability that Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                                           b 1 ) lies outside this interval is smaller
than δ.

Proof of Theorem 1.

                        h                                         i
                τ ∗ = Ep Ep (Y
                             b i (1) | Wi ) − Ep (Yb i (0) | Wi )     (Assumption 4)
                        h                                                               i
                    = Ep Ep (Ei [Yi (1) | Xi (1), Wi ]) − Ep (Ei [Yi (0) | Xi (0), Wi ])
                                  b       e                         b      e

                    = Ep [Ep (Yi (1) + ∆i (1) | Wi ) − Ep (Yi (0) + ∆i (0) | Wi )]

                    = Ep [Ep (Yi (1) − Yi (0) | Wi )] + Ep [Ep (∆i (1) − ∆i (0) | Wi )]

                    = Ep [Yi (1) − Yi (0)] + op (1) (Condition 1).




                                                       (t)                        (t)           ′(t)   ′(t)
Proof of Theorem 3. Under Assumption B1, εj2 ∼ N (0, var(εj2 )), and εj2 ∼ N (0, var(εj2 )),
                                     (t)                (t)            ′(t)              ′(t)
with finite variances. Thus, E[(εj2 )2 ] = var(εj2 ), E[(εj2 )2 ] = var(εj2 ). By Stein’s Lemma,
      (t)              (t)                                      ′(t)
var[(εj2 )2 ] = 2var2 (εj2 ) < ∞, and similarly for var[εj2 )2 ] < ∞.
   Assume that the VAR models are correctly specified. Under Assumptions B1 and B2, and
law of large numbers implies that, as T − T0 → ∞ and T − T0 − LT −T0 → ∞,

                                           PT           (t)
                                                       εj2 )2
                                            t=T0 +r+1 (b                      p         (t)
                                                                              → var(εj2 ),
                                (T − T0 − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1
                               PT                 (t)
                                                 εj2 )2
                                t=T0 +r+1+LT −T (b                            p         (t)
                                                   0
                                                                              → var(εj2 ),
                        (T − T0 − r − LT −T0 ) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1

and likewise,

                                       PT               ′(t)
                                                       εj2 )2
                                            t=T0 +r+1 (b                      p         ′(t)
                                                                              → var(εj2 ),
                                (T − T0 − r) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1
                               PT                 ′(t)
                                                 εj2 )2
                                t=T0 +r+1+LT −T (b                            p         ′(t)
                                                  0
                                                                              → var(εj2 ).
                        (T − T0 − r − LT −T0 ) − (ℓ + 2)r − 1

   Consider the ratio of the two conditional F -statistics, each represented as a function of the
quantities above. After algebraic rearrangement, it can be written as a product of ratios involv-
ing sample residual variances and degree-of-freedom adjustments. Each component converges in
probability on one by the law of large numbers and the continuous mapping theorem. Conse-


                                                       3
quently,

                                       Fb(j1 j2 ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                                          b 1)  p
                                                               −→ 1
                                                    ′
                                       Fb(j j ) (D2 ) | m(D
                                           1 2            b 1)

as T − T0 → ∞ and T − T0 − LT −T0 → ∞.

Proof of Theorem 4. Let Zi follow a Bernoulli distribution with P r(Zi = 1 | Wi ) := σ(ηi ), where
ηi = Wi⊤ β and σ(·) is a smooth link function mapping ηi to (0, 1). Define σi = σ(ηi ), σi′ = σ ′ (ηi ),
               σi′
and ωi =               . The estimator βb denotes the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of β,
          σi (1 − σi )
obtained by maximizing

                             n
                             X
                                    {Zi log σi + (1 − Zi ) log(1 − σi )} .
                              i=1


The corresponding score function is

                                          n
                                          X
                                       S=   (Zi − σi )ωi Wi ,
                                                 i=1


and the Fisher information matrix is

                                               (σi′ )2
                                                              
                                                             ⊤
                                    Iβ = E              W i Wi .
                                           σi (1 − σi )

Under standard regularity conditions,

                                           n
                                        1X
                          βb − β = Iβ−1       (Zi − σi ) ωi Wi + op (n−1/2 ).                        (A3)
                                        n i=1

The corresponding IPW estimator is

                                          n
                                                 (                                           )
                                         1X          Zi Ybi(j1 j2 )   (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )
                          τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) =                            −                            ,
                                         n i=1       σ(W⊤ β)
                                                           i
                                                               b       1 − σ(W⊤ β) i
                                                                                    b


which depends on β.
                 b Define

                                                 n
                                                     (                           )
                                     1X                  Zi Ybi (1 − Zi )Ybi
                             T (β) =                           −                     .
                                     n i=1                σi      1 − σi




                                                               4
Its gradient is
                                        n 
                                                   σi′                 σi′
                                                                               
                                     1X
                          ∇β T (β) =        − Zi Yi 2 − (1 − Zi )Yi
                                                 b               b               Wi .                                     (A4)
                                     n i=1         σi               (1 − σi )2

A first-order Taylor expansion around β gives

                           n
                                  (                                             )
                          1X          Zi Ybi(j1 j2 )   (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )
           τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) −                            −                              = ∇β T (β)⊤ (βb − β) + op (n−1/2 ).
                          n i=1       σ(Wi⊤ β)          1 − σ(Wi⊤ β)

Substituting the expansions the above yields

                                                                            n
                                                                      1X
                                       τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) − τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) =         hi(j1 j2 ) + op (n−1/2 ),
                                                                      n i=1

where

                    Zi Ybi(j1 j2 )      (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )
        hi(j1 j2 ) =                −                        − τ(j∗ 1 j2 )
                   σ(Wi⊤ β)              1 − σ(Wi⊤ β)
                   " n                                                                     #
                                                   ′                             ′
                                                                                       
                     1X                          σ                             σ
                 −                 Zi Ybi(j1 j2 ) 2i + (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )      i
                                                                                         Wi⊤ Iβ−1 (Zi − σi )ωi Wi .
                     n i=1                       σi                         (1 − σi )2

This linear expansion implies that τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) is asymptotically normal with the influence function
hi(j1 j2 ) , i = [1 : n]. If the propensity score model is correctly specified, when under Assumptions
                    √                                d
                         τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) − τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) ) → N (0, V(j1 j2 ) ), as n → ∞, where V(j1 j2 ) = E(n−1 ni=1 h2i(j1 j2 ) ).
                                                                                                           P
1–4, we have n(b



    The proof of Theorem 4 follows similar arguments to those in Qiu et al. (2024). In this
work, the proposed IPW estimator based on the derived multivariate outcomes Y
                                                                            b targets the

estimand defined in terms of the potential outcomes for the unobserved outcome Y, denoted by
τ . Our inference further targets the estimand defined with respect to the potential outcomes
                                     b i , denoted by τ ∗ . Moreover, the link function σ(·) can
associated with the derived outcomes Y
be any smooth mapping from ηi to (0, 1), and is not restricted to the logistic form.

Remark A1. When σ(u) = 1/(1 + e−u ), we have σ ′ (u) = σ(u){1 − σ(u)}, so that ωi = 1. The




                                                                        5
expression for hi(j1 j2 ) above then reduces exactly to the standard logistic regression case:


    Zi Ybi(j1 j2 )   (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 )
                   −                      − τ(j∗ 1 j2 )
    σ(Wi⊤ β)          1 − σ(Wi⊤ β)
    " n (                                                            )    #
     1 X Zi Ybi(j1 j2 ) (1 − σ(Wi⊤ β)) (1 − Zi )Ybi(j1 j2 ) σ(Wi⊤ β)
  −                                                 +                  Wi⊤ Iβ−1 (Zi − σ(Wi⊤ β))Wi .
     n i=1               σ(Wi⊤ β)                       1 − σ(Wi⊤ β)

                                                        p
Proof of Corollary 1. By the consistency of the MLE βb −→ β and by continuity of the smooth
                                        p                  p
function σ(·), it follows that σ(Wi⊤ β)
                                     b −→ σ(Wi⊤ β) and Ib −→ Iβ . For i ∈ [1 : n], we therefore
                  p                            p
     hi(j1 j2 ) → hi(j1 j2 ) and b
have b                            h2i(j1 j2 ) −→ h2i(j1 j2 ) . Thus, the plug-in variance estimator V
                                                                                                    b(j j ) =
                                                                                                       1 2

1
  P n b2                                               2
n   i=1 hi(j1 j2 ) is consistent for V(j1 j2 ) = E{hi(j1 j2 ) }.




A3        Details about simultaneous inference

    After obtaining Gaussian approximations for each component of τ ∗ , we proceed to conduct
simultaneous inference on τ ∗ . Due to the high dimensionality and complex dependency structures
among its components, we apply the Gaussian multiplier bootstrap procedure (?).
    Let M denote the maximum absolute standardized coordinate τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) over indices (j1 , j2 ) with
V
b(j j ) > c for some pre-specified c > 0:
   1 2




                                                            √                                  −1/2
                             M=             max                   τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) − τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) ) V
                                                                n(b                           b
                                                                                               (j1 j2 ) .   (A5)
                                    (j1 ,j2 ): V
                                               b(j j ) >c
                                                  1 2




To approximate the distribution of M, generate i.i.d. standard normal multiplies ξi,b , i ∈ [1 : n]
and bootstrap replication b ∈ [1 : B], and calculate

                                                                       n
                                                               1 X b                  b −1/2 ,
                             Mb =           max               √       ξi,b hi(j1 j2 ) V(j1 j2 )             (A6)
                                      (j1 ,j2 ): V(j1 j2 ) >c
                                                 b              n i=1


Let q1−α denote the (1 − α)- quantile of {Mb , b ∈ [1 : B]}. Simultaneous (1 − α) confidence
intervals for τ ∗ are then given by

                                                     b 1/2                      b 1/2
                               "                                                        #
                                               q 1−α V(j j )              q 1−α V(j j )
                                τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) −     √ 1 2 , τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) +     √ 12 ,                        (A7)
                                                      n                          n


for all (j1 , j2 ) such that V
                             b(j j ) > c.
                                1 2




                                                                 6
   Let S0 denote the initial set of null hypotheses corresponding to components (j1 , j2 ) with
b(j j ) > c and set R0 = ∅. For each iteration k ≥ 1, define
V  1 2




                                                        √
                             M(k) =       max                                b 1/2 ,
                                                            n τb(j∗ 1 j2 ) / V(j1 j2 )
                                       (j1 ,j2 )∈Sk−1


                                                                                         (k)
and let (j1∗ , j2∗ )(k) denote the index attaining this maximum. Let q1−α be the (1 − α)-quantile
                                                                                               (k)
obtained from the Gaussian multiplier bootstrap procedure. If M(k) > q1−α , update


                    Rk = Rk−1 ∪ {(j1∗ , j2∗ )(k) },     Sk = Sk−1 \ {(j1∗ , j2∗ )(k) };


otherwise, terminate the step-down process. Let Rk0 denote the resulting rejection set (dis-
covery set) for some k0 ≥ 1. We then augment Rk0 by adding the next ⌊d |Rk0 |/(1 − d)⌋
most significant remaining hypotheses in Sk0 , ranked by the absolute standardized test statistics
√ ∗           b 1/2 . Let R denote the final discovery set after combining the step-down and aug-
   τ(j1 j2 ) /V
  nb           (j1 j2 )

mentation steps. As shown in Qiu et al. (2024), this procedure can control the FDP exceedance
rate at α and has a power converging to 1, provided that all non-zero τ(j∗ 1 j2 ) have non-degenerated
asymptotic variances.



A4       Details and additional simulation results

A4.1      Details of the data-generating procedure

   We consider multivariate time series of dimension p ∈ {21, 51}. For each subject i = [1 : n],
                                                                  e i (z) for z ∈ {0, 1}, from a
we generate two potential outcomes of length T = 1000, denoted by X
VAR(1) model. The transition matrix follows a block structure, which is partitioned evenly into
3 × 3 blocks, each of size p/3:                                          
                                        A11 A12 A13 
                                                       
                                      A= A
                                         21  A 22 A 23  .
                                                        
                                                       
                                          A31 A32 A33

The diagonal blocks (A11 , A22 , A33 ) represent within-hub autoregressive relationships for three
interconnected groups of brain regions (hubs). Within each diagonal block, diagonal entries are
drawn from Unif(0.72, 0.85), whereas off-diagonal entries are generated from Unif(0.03, 0.08)

                                                        7
with randomly assigned signs.       The off-diagonal blocks represent connectivity between dif-
ferent hubs.       When Zi = 1, a subset of these entries is replaced by values of magnitude
δ ∈ {0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.10}, representing the strength of the intervention effect. When
Zi = 0, all entries in the off-diagonal blocks are set to zero (δ = 0). Baseline connectivity
is further allowed to depend on subject-level covariates Wi , which modifying the transition ma-
trices. After generating, each transition matrix is rescaled to satisfy weak stationarity. For each
simulation replication, the patterns of non-zero entries in the transition matrices is fixed across
subjects.


A4.2        Additional simulation study results

   We examine estimation bias under the null (δ = 0), where the true effect is supposed to be
zero for all components.

            Bias                                         n = 100       n = 200
                                                      p = 21 p = 51 p = 21 p = 51
            (i) Sample splitting + correct PS          0.012    0.093   -0.001    0.078
            (ii) Sample splitting + incorrect PS       0.326    0.664    0.323    0.659
            (iii) No sample splitting + correct PS     0.012    0.093   -0.001    0.078
            (iv) No sample splitting + incorrect PS    0.326    0.664    0.323    0.659

            RMSE                                         n = 100       n = 200
                                                      p = 21 p = 51 p = 21 p = 51
            (i) Sample splitting + correct PS          0.693    0.775    0.588    0.666
            (ii) Sample splitting + incorrect PS       0.970    1.190    0.946    1.174
            (iii) No sample splitting + correct PS     0.693    0.775    0.588    0.666
            (iv) No sample splitting + incorrect PS    0.970    1.190    0.946    1.174

Table A1: Bias (top panel) and RMSE (bottom panel) of the estimated effective connectivity compo-
nents under the global null hypothesis (δ = 0). Bias and RMSE are averaged across ROIs, subjects,
and Monte Carlo replications.


   Table A1 show the mean bias and the root mean squared error (RMSE) averaged across ROIs,
subjects, and Monte Carlo replications. Across all settings, the proposed estimator exhibits mean
bias close to zero and relatively small RMSE, both of which decrease as the sample size increases
from n = 100 to n = 200. These findings indicate that, the proposed procedure provides an
asymptotically unbiased effect estimator under the null. Methods (ii) and (iv), without correctly
specified propensity scores, show substantially inflated biases across all (p, n) combinations.


                                                8
Method (iii), which uses the second half of the time series both for selecting conditions sets
and deriving the causal estimator, performs similarly to the proposed method in all three bias
metrics. This may be due to limited degree of overfitting in our data-generating mechanism,
which is based on relatively simple VAR models. As expected, both absolute bias and RMSE
increases with dimension (p), while increasing the sample size from n = 100 to n = 200 reduces
variability. Overall, under the global null, the proposed method remains approximately unbiased.

           (a)           FWER (δ = 0)

                                                       p = 21                                                                    p = 51
                  100%

                  75%
          FWER




                  50%

                  25%

                   0%
                                   (i)          (ii)              (iii)           (iv)                       (i)          (ii)            (iii)          (iv)
                                                                                           Method

           (b)           Power (δ > 0)

                                                       p = 21                                                                    p = 51
                  100%

                  75%
          Power




                  50%

                  25%

                   0%

                            0.02         0.04          0.06               0.08   0.10                 0.02         0.04          0.06             0.08   0.10
                                                                                              δ

           (c)           FDP (δ > 0)

                                                       p = 21                                                                    p = 51
                  100%

                  75%
          FDP




                  50%

                  25%

                   0%

                            0.02         0.04          0.06               0.08   0.10                 0.02         0.04          0.06             0.08   0.10
                                                                                              δ

           (d)           FDPex (δ > 0)

                                                       p = 21                                                                    p = 51
                  100%

                  75%
          FDPex




                  50%

                  25%

                   0%

                            0.02         0.04          0.06               0.08   0.10                 0.02         0.04          0.06             0.08   0.10
                                                                                              δ

                                                              (i) Sample splitting and correctly specified propensity score (proposed)
                                                              (ii) Sample splitting and incorrectly specified propensity score
                                            Method
                                                              (iii) Without sample splitting and correctly specified propensity score
                                                              (iv) Without sample splitting and incorrectly specified propensity score



Figure A1: Simulation results when the number of subjects n = 200. Panel (a) shows the FWER under
global null; panel (b) shows power under alternatives with varying intervention intensities (δ); panels
(c) and (d) show the FDP and FDPex, respectively, across different values of δ.


   Figure A1 shows the simulation results of FWER, power, FDP, FDPex across different settings


                                                                                          9
when n = 200. The patterns observed for n = 100 (shown in Figure 3 in the main manuscript)
remain largely unchanged, while the power increases when n = 200.



A5       Details and additional data application results

A5.1      Inclusion criteria

   Imaging and clinical data are obtained from phases 3 and 4 of the ADNI. We include par-
ticipants with resting-state fMRI and amyloid PET scans acquired at the same study visit to
ensure temporal alignment between the intervention and functional imaging outcomes. For each
resting-state fMRI scan, a concurrent T1-weighted structural MRI within one year is required
to facilitate accurate spatial registration. Participants are restricted to those classified at entry
as cognitively normal (CN), significant memory concern (SMC), early mild cognitive impair-
ment (EMCI), or mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Accordingly, both the amyloid-positive and
amyloid-negative groups exclude dementia participants, whose effective connectivity patterns
may differ substantially and may be related to dementia processes.


A5.2      Details of fMRI pre-processing

   Resting-state fMRI data are preprocessed using procedures adapted from ?. Raw imaging in
the Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) format are converted to Neu-
roimaging Informatics Technology Initiative (NIfTI) format. For each scan, the first 10 volumes
are discarded to allow for signal equilibration and participants’ adaptation to scanner noise.
Slice-timing correction is then applied using FSL (slicetimer), followed by rigid-body motion
correction with FSL (mcflirt), which also generates six motion parameters for later nuisance
regression. To improve computational stability and harmonize time series length across partici-
pants, motion-corrected data are truncated to the first 197 time points when longer acquisitions
were available. A reference volume is extracted from the motion-corrected data and corrected for
intensity inhomogeneity using N4 bias field correction (?), followed by skull stripping. For each
participant, a concurrent T1-weighted structural MRI acquired closest in time to the resting-
state fMRI scan is selected and similarly processed with N4 bias correction and skull stripping.
Spatial normalization is performed using a two-stage registration strategy implemented in Ad-


                                                 10
vanced Normalization Tools (ANTs). First, the reference image is nonlinearly registered to the
participant’s T1-weighted image using symmetric diffeomorphic normalization (SyN) (?). Sec-
ond, the T1-weighted image is registered to the MNI152 T1 2 mm standard template, and the
resulting composite transformations are applied to the full resting-state fMRI. The normalized
resting-state fMRI data are spatially smoothed with a Gaussian kernel corresponding to a full
width at half maximum (FWHM) of approximately 4.7 mm.
   Regional mean time series are then extracted using the Automated Anatomical Label-
ing 2 (AAL2) atlas, resulting in 120 time series of ROIs per scan(Rolls et al., 2015). Nui-
sance regression is applied to remove motion-related artifacts.     Linear trends are subse-
quently removed, and the data are temporally band-pass filtered (0.01-0.10 Hz) to isolate low-
frequency fluctuations associated with spontaneous neural activity. Finally, weak stationar-
ity of each ROI series is assessed using the augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test, and only
runs in which all 120 ROIs satisfied the stationarity condition are retained for downstream
analysis.   After preprocessing and quality control procedures, the final sample cohort con-
sists of n = 81 participants.   All preprocessing and analysis code is publicly available at
github.com/haiyuesong/Causal-Inference-for-Unobservable-Multivariate-Outcomes.




                                             11
