                                                       RESEARCH ARTICLE

                                                       BIDS apps: Improving ease of use,
                                                       accessibility, and reproducibility of
                                                       neuroimaging data analysis methods
                                                       Krzysztof J. Gorgolewski1*, Fidel Alfaro-Almagro2, Tibor Auer3, Pierre Bellec4,5,
                                                       Mihai Capotă6, M. Mallar Chakravarty7,8, Nathan W. Churchill9, Alexander Li Cohen10, R.
                                                       Cameron Craddock11,12, Gabriel A. Devenyi7,8, Anders Eklund13,14,15, Oscar Esteban1,
                                                       Guillaume Flandin16, Satrajit S. Ghosh17,18, J. Swaroop Guntupalli19, Mark Jenkinson2,
                                                       Anisha Keshavan20, Gregory Kiar21,22, Franziskus Liem23, Pradeep Reddy Raamana24,25,
                                                       David Raffelt26, Christopher J. Steele7,8, Pierre-Olivier Quirion15, Robert E. Smith26,
a1111111111
                                                       Stephen C. Strother24,25, Gaël Varoquaux27, Yida Wang6, Tal Yarkoni28, Russell
a1111111111                                            A. Poldrack1
a1111111111
a1111111111                                            1 Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America, 2 Oxford
a1111111111                                            Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB), Oxford University, Oxford, United
                                                       Kingdom, 3 Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham, United Kingdom,
                                                       4 Centre de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire Gériatrique de Montréal, Montreal, Canada, 5 Department
                                                       of computer science and operations research, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada, 6 Parallel
                                                       Computing Lab, Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA & Hillsboro, Oregon, United States of America, 7 Douglas
                                                       Mental Health University Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 8 Department of Psychiatry McGill
    OPEN ACCESS                                        University, Montreal, Canada, 9 Keenan Research Centre of the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute,
                                                       St. Michael’s Hospital, Ontario, Canada, 10 Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston,
Citation: Gorgolewski KJ, Alfaro-Almagro F, Auer       Massachusetts, United States of America, 11 Computational Neuroimaging Lab, Center for Biomedical
T, Bellec P, Capotă M, Chakravarty MM, et al.          Imaging and Neuromodulation, Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, New York,
(2017) BIDS apps: Improving ease of use,               United States of America, 12 Center for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, New York,
accessibility, and reproducibility of neuroimaging     United States of America, 13 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Linköping University, Linköping,
data analysis methods. PLoS Comput Biol 13(3):         Sweden, 14 Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden,
e1005209. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.             15 Center for Medical Image Science and Visualization (CMIV), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden,
pcbi.1005209                                           16 Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, United Kingdom, 17 McGovern Institute for Brain
                                                       Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America,
Editor: Dina Schneidman, Hebrew University of          18 Department of Otolaryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
Jerusalem, ISRAEL                                      America, 19 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New
                                                       Hampshire, United States of America, 20 UC Berkeley-UCSF Graduate Program in Bioengineering, San
Received: October 24, 2016                             Francisco, California, United States of America, 21 Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University,
                                                       Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America, 22 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins
Accepted: February 23, 2017
                                                       University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America, 23 University Research Priority Program
Published: March 9, 2017                               "Dynamics of Healthy Aging", University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 24 Rotman Research Institute,
                                                       Baycrest Health Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 25 Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Copyright: © 2017 Gorgolewski et al. This is an        Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 26 Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Melbourne,
open access article distributed under the terms of     Victoria, Australia, 27 Parietal team, INRIA Saclay Ile-de-France, Palaiseau, France, 28 Department of
the Creative Commons Attribution License, which        Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of America
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original      * krzysztof.gorgolewski@gmail.com
author and source are credited.

Data Availability Statement: Data used for testing
the software are available at https://osf.io/9q7dv/    Abstract
Funding: This work has been funded by Laura and
                                                       The rate of progress in human neurosciences is limited by the inability to easily apply a wide
John Arnold Foundation and an NIH grant - NIH-
NIBIB R01 EB020740. The funders had no role in         range of analysis methods to the plethora of different datasets acquired in labs around the
study design, data collection and analysis, decision   world. In this work, we introduce a framework for creating, testing, versioning and archiving
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.          portable applications for analyzing neuroimaging data organized and described in compli-
Competing interests: The authors have declared         ance with the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS). The portability of these applications
that no competing interests exist.




PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                                      1 / 16
                                                                                                      BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                            (BIDS Apps) is achieved by using container technologies that encapsulate all binary and
                                            other dependencies in one convenient package. BIDS Apps run on all three major operating
                                            systems with no need for complex setup and configuration and thanks to the comprehen-
                                            siveness of the BIDS standard they require little manual user input. Previous containerized
                                            data processing solutions were limited to single user environments and not compatible with
                                            most multi-tenant High Performance Computing systems. BIDS Apps overcome this limita-
                                            tion by taking advantage of the Singularity container technology. As a proof of concept, this
                                            work is accompanied by 22 ready to use BIDS Apps, packaging a diverse set of commonly
                                            used neuroimaging algorithms.




                                               Author summary
                                               Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive way to measure human brain struc-
                                               ture and activity that has been used for over 25 years. There are thousands MRI studies
                                               performed every year generating a substantial amount of data. At the same time, many
                                               new data analysis methods are being developed every year. The potential of using new
                                               analysis methods on the variety of existing and newly acquired data is hindered by diffi-
                                               culties in software deployment and lack of support for standardized input data. Here we
                                               propose to use container technology to make deployment of a wide range of data analysis
                                               techniques easy. In addition, we adapt the existing data analysis tools to interface with
                                               data organized in a standardized way. We hope that this approach will enable researchers
                                               to access a wider range of methods when analyzing their data which will lead to acceler-
                                               ated progress in human neuroscience.



                                            Introduction
                                            The last 25 years have witnessed a proliferation of methods for imaging the human brain
                                            (including structural, diffusion and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Positron Emis-
                                            sion Tomography, Electroencephalography and Magnetoencephalography). These methods
                                            have been accompanied by literally thousands of different algorithms for signal denoising, nor-
                                            malization, feature extraction, and statistical analysis. Modern analysis pipelines for neuroim-
                                            aging often consist of dozens of steps and rely on software developed by multiple external
                                            groups with each group often developing their own idiosyncratic parameter settings even
                                            when using the same software packages. The increasing complexity of neuroimaging data anal-
                                            ysis has led to many discoveries, and the flexibility provided by the plethora of feature extrac-
                                            tion methods has allowed cognitive and clinical neuroscientists to develop new theories about
                                            the relationships between brain and behavior in healthy and diseased populations.
                                                However, due to the intrinsic heterogeneity of scientific software (arising from the fact that
                                            it rarely is developed for widespread distribution), installing, configuring, and running many
                                            of the available methods is often difficult. Most neuroimaging software packages run natively
                                            on Linux [1] and (to a lesser extent) Mac OS X; however, Windows users often cannot run
                                            software natively. Operating system aside, many scientific packages depend on external librar-
                                            ies (often requiring a particular, sometimes outdated version), and require complex configura-
                                            tions of environment variables and/or data files.
                                                There have been some attempts in the field of neuroinformatics to solve this issue. The
                                            most notable is the NeuroDebian project [2], which provides Debian and Ubuntu Linux



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                   2 / 16
                                                                                                      BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                            distributions with packages containing many of the popular neuroimaging software tools.
                                            Installing packages prepared by the NeuroDebian team is very easy, as it can be performed
                                            with the built-in Debian/Ubuntu package management system. However, this solution only
                                            applies to Linux systems, as Mac OS X and Windows users are required to install Linux inside
                                            a Virtual Machine (VM). Additionally, creating new Debian/Ubuntu packages is a non-trivial
                                            task, which may limit the rate at which new software is added to NeuroDebian.
                                                Another consequence of these deployment and installation issues is that they make it very
                                            difficult to perfectly recreate analysis pipelines, which exacerbates reproducibility issues in
                                            neuroimaging[3]. This is partly due to journal space limitations, which typically preclude a full
                                            accounting of the scientific software stack used to generate results. But even knowing the ver-
                                            sions of all of the software tools employed in an analysis is rarely sufficient to completely
                                            reproduce a workflow. Studies have shown that operating system type, version, and even hard-
                                            ware architecture can influence results in a significant manner [4–6]. Such issues are troubling
                                            in and of themselves and call for thorough investigations into the sources of this variability.
                                            They also raise serious practical concerns for extended longitudinal studies that need to main-
                                            tain the same software (and sometimes even hardware) stack along the time span of an experi-
                                            ment (e.g. a software upgrade midway through the analysis could lead to spurious differences
                                            between groups processed at different points in time).
                                                One potential solution to ease the deployment problem proposed in the bioinformatics
                                            community is to create Virtual Machines (VMs) capturing all of the necessary dependencies
                                            for a workflow [7,8]. Running a Virtual Machine does, however, come with significant perfor-
                                            mance overhead; furthermore, only a few High Performance Computing (HPC) systems
                                            (which have become the primary computational resource for many academics in the last
                                            decade) allow their users to run VMs on large clusters. Building on the virtual machine con-
                                            cept, a more lightweight solution has recently become more prevalent in the industry, known
                                            as ‘operating-system-level-virtualization’ or (more commonly) containers. In contrast to VMs,
                                            containers share the same kernel with the host operating system and thus deliver much better
                                            performance. The bioinformatics community has once again been at the forefront of the adop-
                                            tion of this new technology, with the aim of improving research reproducibility [9–12]. Most
                                            proposed solutions have been based on a particular implementation of the container concept:
                                            ‘Docker’, which, due to its kernel and security requirements, is difficult or impossible to use in
                                            a multi-tenant (serving multiple unprivileged users) environment such as an HPC system
                                            (which is often the most cost-effective computational resource available to researchers).
                                                Finally, most existing neuroimaging data processing pipelines expect input datasets to be
                                            organized and described in different and idiosyncratic ways. To account for variability in
                                            input data organization and a lack of consensus in terms of metadata description, data process-
                                            ing workflows often require users to input metadata manually—in a different fashion for each
                                            pipeline. This expandable step can cause errors and lead to incorrect results, while also making
                                            it harder to integrate processing pipelines into automated analysis platforms such as those
                                            developed to provide “Science as a Service” [13].
                                                After careful evaluation of existing solutions for the specific problems faced by the neuro-
                                            imaging community, we have developed a framework for sharing and executing neuroimaging
                                            analysis pipelines that improve ease of use, accessibility, and reproducibility for users of all
                                            three major operating systems, as well as for researchers using HPC or cloud computing sys-
                                            tems. The framework overcomes Docker’s inability to run on multi-tenant HPC systems by
                                            capitalizing on the Singularity [14] container technology developed specifically for HPC use.
                                            To minimize the number of manual inputs required from researchers—and hence reduce the
                                            number of errors arising from misinterpretation of those inputs—the framework capitalizes
                                            on the recently introduced Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) standard [15] for organizing



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                   3 / 16
                                                                                                     BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                            and describing datasets. Correspondingly, the proposed framework is named BIDS Apps. We
                                            describe here the anatomy of a BIDS App, the infrastructure used for building, testing and
                                            archiving BIDS Apps, as well as steps necessary to run BIDS Apps in various scenarios.


                                            Results
                                            What is a BIDS App?
                                            A BIDS App is a container image capturing a neuroimaging pipeline that takes a BIDS-format-
                                            ted dataset as input. Since the input is a whole dataset, apps are able to combine multiple
                                            modalities, sessions, and/or subjects, but at the same time need to implement ways to query
                                            input datasets. Each BIDS App has the same core set of command-line arguments, making
                                            them easy to run and integrate into automated platforms. BIDS Apps are constructed in a way
                                            that does not depend on any software outside of the container image other than the container
                                            engine.
                                               BIDS Apps rely upon two technologies for container computing:
                                            1. Docker—for building, hosting as well as running containers on local hardware (running
                                               Windows, Mac OS X or Linux) or in the cloud.
                                            2. Singularity—for running containers on HPCs [14].
                                               BIDS Apps are deposited in the Docker Hub (http://hub.docker.com) repository, making
                                            them openly accessible. Each app is versioned and all of the historical versions are available to
                                            download. By reporting the BIDS App name and version in a manuscript, authors can provide
                                            others with the ability to exactly replicate their analysis workflow.
                                               Docker is used for its excellent documentation, maturity, and the Docker Hub service for
                                            storage and distribution of the images. Docker containers are easily run on personal comput-
                                            ers and cloud services. However, the Docker Engine was originally designed to run different
                                            components of web services (HTTP servers, databases etc.) using cloud resources. Docker thus
                                            requires root or root-like permissions, as well as modern versions of Linux kernel (to perform
                                            user mapping and management of network resources); though this is not a problem in context
                                            of renting cloud resources (which are not shared with other users), it makes it difficult or
                                            impossible to use in a multi-tenant environment such as an HPC system, which is often the
                                            most cost-effective computational resource available to researchers. Singularity, on the other
                                            hand, is a unique container technology designed from the ground up with the encapsulation of
                                            binary dependencies and HPC use in mind. Its main advantage over Docker is that it does not
                                            require root access for container execution and thus is safe to use on multi-tenant systems. In
                                            addition, it does not require recent Linux kernel functionalities (such as namespaces, cgroups
                                            and capabilities), making it easy to install on legacy systems.


                                            How to create a BIDS App?
                                               BIDS Apps forge. Inspired by the conda-forge project (https://conda-forge.github.io/),
                                            BIDS Apps development is centered around a GitHub organization (http://github.com/
                                            BIDS-Apps) that maintains a code repository for each BIDS App (see Fig 1). Every repository
                                            hosts a Dockerfile describing how to build the container image, a lightweight wrapper for
                                            providing a unified command-line interface as well as parsing the BIDS input, and brief docu-
                                            mentation. BIDS Apps are an evolution of lightweight wrappers such as the Interface class
                                            developed within Nipype [16], with the added advantage of being programming language
                                            agnostic. Since BIDS Apps merely serve the purpose of capturing dependencies and providing
                                            a unified way of calling the relevant program (through the command-line interface), the



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                  4 / 16
                                                                                                               BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines




    Fig 1. Overview of the creation and use of BIDS Apps. The source code of each App is stored in separate GitHub repository. Each repository is
    connected to a Continuous Integration server responsible for building testing and deploying the corresponding App. For every new release of an App, a
    new container image is deposited in Docker Hub. Users can directly download and run the BIDS Apps container images either directly using Docker on
    any Windows, Mac, and Linux machine or convert them to Singularity and run them on an HPC.
    https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209.g001

                                                   repositories in the github.com/BIDS-Apps organization do not actually host the source code
                                                   or data of the pipelines and workflows being wrapped: these are contained in the built Docker
                                                   image stored on DockerHub. Building a BIDS App starts with creating a new repository and
                                                   populating it with a Dockerfile and a run script.
                                                      Dockerfile creation. A Dockerfile is a script written in a domain specific language that
                                                   describes the steps necessary to build a Docker image. The Docker project provides excellent
                                                   documentation and a tutorial on how to write Dockerfiles (https://docs.docker.com/engine/
                                                   reference/builder/). However, because the container images built in the BIDS-Apps format are
                                                   ultimately intended to alternatively run under Singularity, there are some additional require-
                                                   ments that must be followed:
                                                   • Apps cannot rely on having elevated permissions inside the container image (in contrast to
                                                     Docker, processes inside a Singularity container run with the privileges of the user running
                                                     the container).
                                                   • Environment variables must be set using the ENV statement within the relevant Dockerfile,
                                                     rather than relying on config files (such as /root/.bashrc).
                                                   • Apps should not write anywhere outside of /tmp, $HOME, and the specific output folder
                                                     provided as a command-line argument.




PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                              5 / 16
                                                                                                         BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                               To facilitate the process of writing Dockerfiles, we have created a set of templates that
                                            include installation steps for the most popular neuroimaging tools (FSL, FreeSurfer, AFNI,
                                            ANTs etc.): https://github.com/BIDS-Apps/dockerfile-templates. Those templates are also
                                            available as container images that can be used directly as a base for new BIDS Apps Dockerfiles
                                            using the FROM statement.
                                               Command-line interface. To improve user experience and ability to integrate BIDS Apps
                                            into various computational platforms, each App follows a set of core command-line
                                            arguments:
                                               runscript input_dataset output_folder analysis_level
                                               For example:
                                               runscript /data/ds114 /scratch/outputs participant
                                            • input_dataset provides a path to the dataset to be analyzed (read-only), which must
                                              conform to the BIDS standard
                                            • output_folder is the folder where results of the analysis will be stored
                                            • analysis_level denotes the stage of the analysis that will be performed
                                                To facilitate easy and efficient execution, analyses in BIDS Apps can be split into stages (see
                                            Materials and Methods). In the simplest design, an App would run in two stages: ‘participant’
                                            and ‘group’. The ‘participant’ stage runs a first level analysis that can be performed indepen-
                                            dently for each subject in the dataset (and thus can be executed in parallel). The analysis may
                                            optionally be restricted to a subset of participants using the—participant_label argu-
                                            ment. The group level analysis runs on the outputs from the participant level analysis and
                                            cannot be split into independent parallel jobs. This scheme is inspired by the MapReduce pro-
                                            gramming model [17]. Multiple such MapReduce steps can be defined for a single pipeline
                                            (full specification of the command-line scheme can be found in the Materials and Methods
                                            section).
                                                There are no restrictions on what language is used to write the wrapper script as long as it
                                            conforms to the prescribed interface. However, to make it easier to generate new BIDS Apps
                                            we have created a basic implementation in Python that can be imported into a new script and
                                            filled with App-specific options: https://github.com/BIDS-Apps/bidscmd. We also provide
                                            several utilities that make it easier to work with BIDS-compatible directory structures—most
                                            notably, the PyBIDS Python package (https://github.com/INCF/pybids), which provides tools
                                            for simple but powerful logical queries over entities defined in the BIDS specification (e.g.,
                                            retrieving a list of all unique subjects; getting the fieldmap files for all subjects with a valid first
                                            scanning run; etc.).
                                                In addition to conforming to a standardized command-line argument scheme, run scripts
                                            are also responsible for validation of the input data before running any analysis. To facilitate
                                            the process we have developed a command-line validator that checks whether the input data-
                                            sets are compliant with the BIDS standard https://github.com/INCF/bids-validator. Because
                                            not all BIDS compatible datasets can be analyzed by all BIDS Apps (e.g. a surface reconstruc-
                                            tion pipeline requires a high-resolution T1 weighted image), the validator can be configured to
                                            reject datasets with particular properties. Integrating the validator is as easy as calling an exter-
                                            nal command; Dockerfiles and container images with the validator pre-installed are also avail-
                                            able. BIDS Apps developers can also choose to implement validation steps themselves if the
                                            requirements of their pipelines cannot be easily checked by the standard validator.
                                                Building and testing container images. For each BIDS App a Docker image is built and
                                            run on a set of lightweight example BIDS datasets [18]. This execution tests that the com-
                                            mand-line interface and BIDS support are correctly implemented (each BIDS App is required



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                       6 / 16
                                                                                                     BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                            to include at least one smoke or integration test running on an example BIDS dataset). The
                                            tests are run forcing read-only containers, to ensure compatibility with Singularity (which
                                            imposes read-only mode). If the Docker image builds successfully and passes all tests, it is
                                            assigned a unique version (based on the tag obtained from the corresponding GitHub reposi-
                                            tory) and uploaded to Docker Hub with a version tag. Since version tags are unique and
                                            Docker images stored on Docker Hub are never overwritten, all historical versions of each
                                            BIDS App will always be accessible. Building, testing and archiving of BIDS Apps is performed
                                            automatically through a continuous integration service (CircleCI). Automation of testing and
                                            versioning improves reliability due to minimization of human errors.
                                                To facilitate the process of creating new BIDS Apps we have made an example App that can
                                            also be used as a template for new Apps: https://github.com/BIDS-Apps/example. Additional
                                            documentation and tutorials are available at http://bids-apps.neuroimaging.io. Developers
                                            seeking help are also encouraged to subscribe to the bids-app-dev mailing list at https://
                                            groups.google.com/d/forum/bids-apps-dev.


                                            Available BIDS Apps
                                            At the moment there are 22 BIDS Apps (see Table 1) in the repository, most of which were
                                            developed by participants in the 2016 sprint (see Materials and Methods). The Apps span dif-
                                            ferent imaging modalities (structural, functional and diffusion MRI) as well as languages
                                            (Python, C++, MATLAB/Octave, OpenCL).


                                            Running a BIDS App locally
                                            Running a BIDS App on a local system can be performed using Docker, which is easy to install
                                            on all three major operating systems. To run the first stage of the example BIDS App for partic-
                                            ipant number 01 the user needs to open a console (terminal or cmd) and type:
                                               docker run -ti --rm \
                                                  -v /Users/cajal/data/ds005:/bids_dataset:ro \
                                                  -v /Users/cajal/outputs:/outputs \
                                                  bids/example:0.0.4 \
                                                  /bids_dataset /outputs participant --participant_label 01
                                               Where /Users/cajal/data/ds005 is the path to the input dataset and /Users/cajal/outputs the
                                            path where results should be stored. If the BIDS App was not run before on this machine, the
                                            Docker image will be automatically downloaded from the Docker Hub.


                                            Running a BIDS App on a cluster (HPC)
                                            On many academic clusters, Singularity can be used to run containers (due to its minimal
                                            dependencies and security concerns Singularity is more likely to be approved for multi-tenant
                                            systems usage than Docker). In these setting, to run a BIDS App, it first needs to be saved to a
                                            Singularity-compatible image file. This step needs to be performed outside of the cluster (for
                                            example on a laptop) and requires Docker:
                                               docker run --privileged -ti --rm \
                                                  -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock\
                                                  -v D:\singularity_images:/output \
                                                  singularityware/docker2singularity \
                                                  bids/example:0.0.4
                                               Where D:\singularity_images is a path where the Singularity image will be stored. After
                                            transferring the.img file to a cluster it can be run like any other executable:



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                  7 / 16
                                                                                                                           BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



Table 1. List of currently available BIDS Apps.
App name                                            Description                                                                     Applicable         References
                                                                                                                                    modalities
example                                             Example App that also serves as a template for new apps. Calculates             T1w                n/a
                                                    intracranial volume.
Freesurfer                                          Surface extraction, longitudinal pipeline and study specific template           T1w                [19,20]
                                                    calculation using FreeSurfer.
ndmg                                                One-click reliable and reproducible pipeline for T1w + DWI weighted MRI         T1w, DWI           [21,22]
                                                    connectome estimation.
BROCCOLI                                            Fast fMRI analysis on many-core CPUs and GPUs.                                  T1w, fMRI          [23]
FibreDensityAndCrosssection                         Fixel-Based Analysis (FBA) of Fibre Density and Fibre Cross-section.            DWI                [24,25]
SPM                                                 Statistical Parametric Mapping.                                                 T1w, fMRI          [26]
MRIQC                                               Quality Assessment of structural and functional MRI.                            T1w, fMRI          [52]
FMRIPREP                                            A generic fMRI preprocessing pipeline providing results robust to the input     T1w, fMRI          In
                                                    data quality as well as informative reports.                                                       preparation
Quality Assessment Protocol                         Quality Assessment of structural and functional MRI.                            T1w, fMRI          [27]
Configurable Pipeline for the Analysis of           Pipeline for high throughput processing and analysis of structural and          T1w, fMRI          [28]
Connectomes                                         functional MRI data.
Hyperalignment                                      Computes hyperalignment transformations for functional alignment.               fMRI               [29]
mindboggle                                          Pipeline to improve the accuracy, precision, and consistency of automated       T1w                [30]
                                                    labeling and shape analysis of human brain image data.
MRtrix3 connectome                                  Robust generation and statistical analysis of structural connectomes            T1w, DWI           [31]
                                                    estimated from diffusion tractography.
nilearn                                             Extraction of time-series and connectomes for population analysis.              fMRI               [32]
nipypelines                                         Preprocessing of functional time series for resting or task analysis            T1w, fMRI          [16]
automatic analysis (aa)                             Neuroimaging pipeline system written in Matlab.                                 T1w, T2w, fMRI,    [33]
                                                                                                                                    DWI
Niak Preprocessing                                  Noise reduction, segmentation, coregistration, motion estimation,               fMRI               [34]
                                                    resampling.
HPCPipelines                                        Anatomical and functional preprocessing pipelines used in the Human             T1w, T2w, fMRI     [35,36]
                                                    Connectome Project.
BrainIAK-SRM                                        Functional alignment using Shared Response Model implementation from            fMRI               [37]
                                                    the Brain Imaging Analysis Kit.
OPPNI                                               Optimization of Preprocessing Pipelines for NeuroImaging, for analysis of       fMRI               [38–41]
                                                    fMRI data.
MAGeTbrain                                          Multiple Automatically Generated Templates brain segmentation algorithm         T1w                [42–45]
tracula                                             Automatic reconstruction of a set of major white-matter pathways from           T1w, DWI           [46]
                                                    diffusion-weighted MR images
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209.t001


                                                         ./bids_example-0.0.4.img /bids_dataset /outputs participant --
                                                      participant_label 01
                                                         It is worth noting that copying and running Singularity images does not require elevated
                                                      permissions.

                                                      Discussion
                                                      We have proposed a new way of distributing easy-to-use, reproducible neuroimaging analysis
                                                      workflows that can run on all three major operating systems as well as multi-tenant clusters.
                                                      Each BIDS App encapsulates all of its binary dependencies providing the means for reproduc-
                                                      ible analysis as well as an ultimate source of provenance information. Due to the BIDS stan-
                                                      dard used for the organization of input data, errors caused by manually provided metadata are
                                                      minimized. Finally, the unified command-line interface structure combined with flexible
                                                      MapReduce-style execution schemes lends BIDS Apps to easy integration into data analysis



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                                          8 / 16
                                                                                                       BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                            platforms as well as efficient execution on computational clusters independently of the particu-
                                            lar scheduling software.
                                                To prove the viability of the BIDS Apps concept we have developed 20 Apps representing a
                                            diverse set of neuroimaging software originating from many different labs. We are expecting
                                            that the number of available apps will grow in the future. We are actively encouraging neuro-
                                            imaging methods developers to deploy their tools as BIDS App to further grow the library of
                                            available pipelines.
                                                One of the goals of this project was to deliver software that could be applied to wide range of
                                            datasets without the need for much user interaction. It is important to emphasize that this goal
                                            is not at odds with the ability to modify various parameters of the workflows encapsulated in
                                            BIDS Apps. This is an important ability since many researchers have unique needs and many
                                            data analysis decisions are considered open scientific questions. The ability to modify internal
                                            parameters vary across the presented BIDS Apps, but many of them provide it either in form of
                                            command line parameters or input config files. We hope that with the help of new users app
                                            developers will be able to learn which parameters should be exposed for modification.
                                                It is also important to note that fact that BIDS Apps framework even though is built on con-
                                            tainer technology (which can be misinterpreted as a “black box”) it does not imply a particular
                                            software development philosophy. Some BIDS Apps are interfaces to open source projects
                                            with vibrant developer communities built around public developer interactions while some
                                            are developed in a restricted access setting by a smaller set of developers located at a particular
                                            institute. By choosing GitHub as the platform for hosting BIDS Apps we hope to foster a
                                            vibrant and open community of developers contributing to run scripts, Dockerfiles, and
                                            documentation.
                                                Even though similar solutions based on Docker have been proposed in the past, none have
                                            addressed the problem of running Docker containers on HPCs. One study evaluating Docker
                                            in the context of HPC use [47] had to limit access to the Docker-enabled cluster only to
                                            “trusted” users due to security concerns (personal communication). The solution proposed
                                            here combines mature container building tools provided for multiple operating systems by the
                                            Docker project with HPC compatibility through Singularity.
                                                Additionally, similarly to previous proposals [9,10], the presented solution puts a strong
                                            emphasis on clear versioning of container images and the ability to access all previous versions.
                                            We envisage that this feature will be very valuable in the context of longitudinal studies (where
                                            the same software stack needs to be used over many years) as well as for accurately reporting
                                            a set of computational methods in a publication and later replicating them (which can be
                                            achieved by simply referencing a BIDS App with a corresponding version). Strict versioning of
                                            BIDS Apps is achieved by careful management of Docker images on Docker Hub via a Contin-
                                            uous Integration service which also is responsible for testing the Docker images, further reduc-
                                            ing potential errors.
                                                It is also worth noting that even though containers increase the reproducibility of scientific
                                            results, they do not solve the problem of sensitivity of some results to different operating sys-
                                            tems, architectures or third party libraries. In particular, numerical and statistical instabilities
                                            create an artificial dependence of results on hardware details that can only be addressed algo-
                                            rithmically. Further research is necessary to assess the robustness of published results to these
                                            factors. BIDS Apps can help in this endeavor to a certain extent—for example, a single analysis
                                            can be run using different versions of the same BIDS App to see the variance in results (differ-
                                            ent flavors of the same App using different Linux distributions could be created for this pur-
                                            pose). However this approach has limits, further work is needed to better understand the
                                            potential for variance in results due to different Linux kernel versions across different systems
                                            and hardware architectures since containers do not encapsulate this.



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                    9 / 16
                                                                                                        BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                                Another advantage of container-based solutions is that the user can run software in an
                                            almost identical software ecosystem as the one used for its development. This reduces the
                                            number of problems experienced by users due to nuanced differences in system configuration,
                                            such as system libraries or software versions. It also makes maintaining the software signifi-
                                            cantly easier for the developers, who do not need to support a variety of different configura-
                                            tions and can easily reproduce errors.
                                                Even though BIDS Apps as a form of neuroimaging software distribution scheme can be
                                            perceived as performing a similar task as the NeuroDebian project, the two initiatives, in fact,
                                            complement each other. Many of the example BIDS Apps presented in this manuscript use
                                            Debian as their base distribution and benefit from the ease of installation provided by the Neu-
                                            roDebian project. It not only makes Dockerfiles shorter and easier to maintain but due to the
                                            network of NeuroDebian mirror servers the build process is more reliable than downloading
                                            software from their original locations. On the other hand, the NeuroDebian project benefits
                                            from the BIDS App distribution scheme by exposing software previously limited only to
                                            Debian based distribution to all flavors of Linux. This is important considering that many
                                            HPCs run on RedHat and CentOS Linux distributions rather than Debian.
                                                Future work will involve engaging more developers of neuroimaging methods to create
                                            BIDS Apps. Additionally, there are plans for developing a repository that would be indepen-
                                            dent of Docker Hub to provide Open Container Consortium as well as Singularity-compatible
                                            images. This would provide improved sustainability of the project, but also remove the conver-
                                            sion step (from Docker to Singularity) currently necessary for running BIDS Apps on clusters.
                                                Work is currently underway to facilitate the integration of BIDS Apps in other platforms
                                            such as XNAT [48], CBRAIN [49], or cloud-based services like Amazon Web Service (AWS).
                                            The apps will include a machine-readable description of input arguments, their descriptions
                                            and acceptable values (based on the Boutiques application descriptor [50]. Another benefit of
                                            such a description is to allow developers integrating BIDS Apps into their platforms to auto-
                                            matically generate user interfaces, and to improve validation of input parameters.
                                                Singularity is not the only solution proposed to handle containers on HPCs. “Shifter” (as of
                                            September 2016 only available as pre-release beta version) has been discussed in the context of
                                            running containerized academic software [51]. The principles behind Shifter are similar to
                                            Singularity, but Shifter also attempts to tackle the problem of managing the container images.
                                            Because of this, it depends on several services (Redis and MongoDB servers, worker processes,
                                            etc.) that make setting it up and maintaining it more involved than Singularity. However,
                                            despite the differences, all BIDS Apps would be able to run on clusters running Shifter.
                                                Singularity is despite its many advantages is not perfect. The need to convert Docker con-
                                            tainer images outside using docker2singularity tool is less than ideal. In the future, this will be
                                            a new feature of Singularity (currently in development) that will allow HPC users to directly
                                            import container images from Docker Hub (without the requirement of elevated privileges or
                                            access to Docker software). As mentioned above Singularity due to its minimal system require-
                                            ments is easy to install. We are currently aware of 51 HPCs spread around the world that sup-
                                            port Singularity (https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Vc_1prq_1WHGf0LWtpUBY-
                                            tfKdLLM_TErjnCe1mY5m0/pub?gid=1407658660). This list includes systems located at pres-
                                            tigious institutions such as National Institutes of Health, Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
                                            ogy, and Stanford University as well as the 17th most powerful HPC in the world—Stampede,
                                            located at Texas Advanced Computing Center (https://www.top500.org/system/177931).
                                            Nonetheless, Singularity is still fairly new and it is fair to assume that it is not installed on most
                                            existing HPCs. Finally, Singularity container images require root permission to create or mod-
                                            ify (this is why conversion from Docker needs to be performed outside of the target HCP).
                                            On one side this can be perceived as inconvenience preventing users from performing quick



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                    10 / 16
                                                                                                     BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                            modifications of container images. However, on the other side, the side effect of this limitation
                                            is that users are forced to create a new container image file each time an app is updated which
                                            promotes versioning and reproducibility.
                                                The proposed way of archiving BIDS Apps—using Docker Hub—even though convenient
                                            and cost effective (using Docker Hub is free for public images) might pose challenges in the
                                            long term. Docker Hub does not make any commitments about the availability of images. To
                                            avoid potential loss of images uploaded to Docker Hub we plan to periodically backup all of
                                            the BIDS Apps in a repository dedicated for long term academic storage such as the Stanford
                                            Digital Library.
                                                Despite its relatively young age, we are already seeing interest in various BIDS Apps. Some
                                            of the early adopters helped resolve issues and fix bugs. According to Docker Hub, BIDS Apps
                                            have been so far been downloaded 1389 times. Even though it will take up to two years until
                                            we start seeing papers describing studies that were using BIDS Apps, we already know of two
                                            studies that used BIDS Apps for data preprocessing (personal communication).
                                                In the future, we plan to extend the BIDS Apps framework by adding a specification for
                                            analysis outputs and extending the input specification beyond MRI data. An effort is currently
                                            underway to define BIDS Derivatives specification that would cover description and organiza-
                                            tion of data analysis outputs. Adoption of such standard will allow chaining multiple apps. The
                                            FMRIPREP app already supports an early version of the BIDS Derivatives specification. In a
                                            similar vein, two extensions of the BIDS standard are in final stages of development: BIDS
                                            MEG and BIDS PET. That effort—when finalized—will allow the BIDS Apps family to be
                                            extended by tools dedicated to modalities other than MRI.
                                                It is also worth mentioning that even though the proposed framework is focused on the
                                            analysis of neuroimaging data, a similar scheme could be applied to other types of data. The
                                            only elements that are specific to human neuroimaging in BIDS Apps are the format of
                                            the input data and the naming convention for command line parameters (“participant”
                                            and”group”). Other fields with well-established data standards can easily adopt the same way
                                            of constructing, testing and archiving pipelines with their software dependencies.
                                                BIDS Apps is a framework to help neuroimaging practitioners deploy the complex data
                                            processing workflows that they require in their research. Leveraging existing technologies such
                                            as GitHub and CircleCI and extensively using containers (Docker and Singularity), the pro-
                                            posed ecosystem automatically generates the appropriate container images with a minimized
                                            impact on the researcher’s development flow. This paper shows how these apps are created,
                                            stored, and executed either locally or in HPCs. To maximize interoperability and reduce man-
                                            ual metadata handling, BIDS Apps require that input data are in the BIDS organization format.
                                            The ultimate goal of BIDS Apps is reproducibility, thus this framework is particularly focused
                                            on archiving and versioning of neuroimaging workflows.



                                            Materials and methods
                                            Engaging the community
                                            To kickstart the repository of BIDS Apps, a four-day long coding sprint was organized at Stan-
                                            ford University in August 2016. Leading neuroimaging methods and workflow developers
                                            were invited to learn about BIDS, Docker, and Singularity. In addition, the sprint was adver-
                                            tised on the Stanford Center for Reproducible Neuroscience and Twitter, and outreach was
                                            performed during the 2016 OHBM Meeting in Geneva. The workshop consisted of one day of
                                            training; during the remaining three days, hands-on support was provided by experienced
                                            Docker developers.



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                 11 / 16
                                                                                                                   BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines




      Fig 2. The overall structure of workflows. Workflows will need to decouple the individual level analysis (process independent subjects) from the
      group-level analysis. For the analysis of individual subjects, the workflow will require an understanding of the BIDS structure so that the required inputs
      for the designated subject are found. The optional reducer module will take up from results generated in the mapper and generate a group output. The
      overall workflow has an entrypoint and an endpoint responsible of setting-up the map-reduce tasks and the tear-down including organizing the outputs
      for its archiving, respectively. Please mind that each app can implement multiple map and reduce steps (see Advanced use cases).
      https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209.g002



                                                   Command-line specification
                                                   This approach to run our workflows requires sticking with three standards: 1) a common com-
                                                   mand-line interface, 2) a Docker container to ensure portability, and 3) a standard for organiz-
                                                   ing input data. Containers created this way can be easily integrated into OpenfMRI as well as
                                                   other data analysis platforms. Thanks to Docker-to-Singularity conversion they can also be
                                                   easily run on High Performance Computers (clusters) without the need to install all of the
                                                   dependencies.
                                                       Each workflow/pipeline will be run independently for each subject (the map step). Results
                                                   of this execution (arranged in whatever way the pipeline prefers) can be optionally processed
                                                   in a group level analysis (reduce step–see Fig 2).



                                                   Command line interface
                                                   Each pipeline should have a simple wrapper script used to run it. The script should be a com-
                                                   mand-line interface and accept the following command-line arguments (minimally):
                                                   1. For the participant level (aka map) step:
                                                      • bids_dir—(positional argument #1) the directory with the input dataset formatted
                                                        according to the BIDS standard. This directory is read only.
                                                      • output_dir—(positional_argument #2) the directory where the output files should be
                                                        stored. This is the only directory the pipeline should write to. Can be used to store inter-
                                                        mediate files, but they should be removed after the pipeline finishes. This directory is
                                                        shared across all of the participant level jobs—it’s up to the script to create subfolders for
                                                        each subject.



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                                   12 / 16
                                                                                                       BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                               • “participant”—(positional_argument #3) indicates that this is a participant level
                                                 analysis.
                                               • --participant_label—(optional) label of the participant that should be analyzed.
                                                 The label corresponds to sub-<participant_label> from the BIDS spec (so it does not
                                                 include “sub-”). If this parameter is not provided all subjects should be analyzed. Multiple
                                                 participants can be specified with a space separated list.
                                                 Example:

                                               Run processing for every subject independently (map step). Each of these operations can be
                                                performed in parallel. There are no restrictions or specification of how data should be orga-
                                                nized inside the output_dir
                                               ./my_pipeline /data/my_dataset /scratch/outputs participant --
                                                participant_label 01
                                               ./my_pipeline /data/my_dataset /scratch/outputs participant --
                                                participant_label 02
                                               ./my_pipeline /data/my_dataset /scratch/outputs participant --
                                                participant_label 03
                                               ...
                                            2. (Optional) For the group level (aka reduce) step:

                                               • bids_dir—(positional argument #1) the directory with the input dataset formatted
                                                 according to the BIDS standard. This directory is read only.
                                               • output_dir—(positional_argument #2) the directory where the output files should be
                                                 stored. This is the only directory the pipeline should write to. Can be used to store inter-
                                                 mediate files, but they should be removed after the pipeline finishes. This directory is the
                                                 same one that was used in the participant level analysis and should be prepopulated with
                                                 participant level results before running the group level.
                                               • “group”—(positional_argument #3) indicates that this is a group level analysis.
                                               • --participant_label—(optional) labels of the participants that should be analyzed.
                                                 The label corresponds to sub-<participant_label> from the BIDS spec (so it does not
                                                 include “sub-”). If this parameter is not provided all subjects should be analyzed. Multiple
                                                 participants can be specified with a space separated list. This can be useful if you want to
                                                 do a group level analysis on a subset of all participants in your dataset
                                                 Example:

                                               ./my_pipeline /data/my_dataset /scratch/outputs group
                                               The script can also accept other arguments specific to your pipeline (see for example --
                                            template_name in FreeSurfer App). Mind that the same set of extra arguments will be
                                            passed to the map (single subject level) and the reduce (group level) stage.

                                            Advanced use cases
                                            • Multiple map reduce steps. In case your pipeline needs to do multiple map reduce steps the
                                              analysis_level (third positional argument) can take additional arguments: participant2,
                                              group2, participant3, group3 etc. In the description of your app please specify
                                              how many map reduce steps are necessary.



PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                   13 / 16
                                                                                                                BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                            • Within-job multi-CPU parallelization. Each job (on any given level: participant or group)
                                              might be run on a multi-CPU machine; in such case, a parameter --n_cpus followed by
                                              an integer will be passed with the number of CPUs available.
                                            • If your app is capable of adapting its workflow depending on how much memory is available
                                              on the environment it is running on you can implement an optional --mem_mb flag. When
                                              running your app the execution system will pass available memory in megabytes.




                                            Author Contributions
                                            Conceptualization: KJG RAP.
                                            Funding acquisition: RAP KJG SSG.
                                            Methodology: KJG OE.
                                            Software: KJG FAA TA PB MC MMC NWC ALC RCC GAD AE OE GF SSG JSG MJ AK GK
                                               FL PRR DR CJS POQ RES SCS GV YW TY RAP.
                                            Supervision: RAP.
                                            Visualization: KJG.
                                            Writing – original draft: KJG.
                                            Writing – review & editing: KJG FAA TA PB MC MMC NWC ALC RCC GAD AE OE GF
                                              SSG JSG MJ AK GK FL PRR DR CJS POQ RES SCS GV YW TY RAP.


                                            References
                                              1.   Hanke M, Halchenko YO. Neuroscience runs on GNU / Linux. Front Neuroinform. 2011; 5: 7–9.
                                              2.   Halchenko YO, Hanke M. Open is not enough. Let’ s take the next step: An integrated, community-
                                                   driven computing platform for neuroscience. Front Neuroinform. 2012; 6.
                                              3.   Boekel W, Wagenmakers E-J, Belay L, Verhagen J, Brown S, Forstmann BU. A purely confirmatory
                                                   replication study of structural brain-behavior correlations. Cortex. 2015; 66: 115–133. https://doi.org/10.
                                                   1016/j.cortex.2014.11.019 PMID: 25684445
                                              4.   Mackenzie-Graham AJ, Van Horn JD, Woods RP, Crawford KL, Toga AW. Provenance in neuroimag-
                                                   ing. Neuroimage. 2008; 42: 178–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.04.186 PMID:
                                                   18519166
                                              5.   Gronenschild EHBM, Habets P, Jacobs HIL, Mengelers R, Rozendaal N, van Os J, et al. The Effects of
                                                   FreeSurfer Version, Workstation Type, and Macintosh Operating System Version on Anatomical Vol-
                                                   ume and Cortical Thickness Measurements. Hayasaka S, editor. PLoS One. 2012; 7: e38234. https://
                                                   doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038234 PMID: 22675527
                                              6.   Glatard T, Lewis LB, da Silva RF, Adalat R, Beck N, Lepage C, et al. Reproducibility of neuroimaging
                                                   analyses across operating systems. Front Neuroinform. Frontiers; 2015; 9.
                                              7.   Angiuoli SV, Matalka M, Gussman A, Galens K, Vangala M, Riley DR, et al. CloVR: a virtual machine
                                                   for automated and portable sequence analysis from the desktop using cloud computing. BMC Bioinfor-
                                                   matics. 2011; 12: 356. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-356 PMID: 21878105
                                              8.   Krampis K, Booth T, Chapman B, Tiwari B, Bicak M, Field D, et al. Cloud BioLinux: pre-configured and
                                                   on-demand bioinformatics computing for the genomics community. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012; 13: 42.
                                                   https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-13-42 PMID: 22429538
                                              9.   Folarin AA, Dobson RJB, Newhouse SJ. NGSeasy: a next generation sequencing pipeline in Docker
                                                   containers. F1000Res. 2015; 4.
                                             10.   Moreews F, Sallou O, Ménager H, Le Bras Y, Monjeaud C, Blanchet C, et al. BioShaDock: a community
                                                   driven bioinformatics shared Docker-based tools registry. F1000Res. 2015; 4: 1443. https://doi.org/10.
                                                   12688/f1000research.7536.1 PMID: 26913191




PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                                14 / 16
                                                                                                                 BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                             11.   Devisetty UK, Kennedy K, Sarando P, Merchant N, Lyons E. Bringing your tools to CyVerse Discovery
                                                   Environment using Docker. F1000Res. 2016; 5.
                                             12.   Belmann P, Dröge J, Bremges A, McHardy AC, Sczyrba A, Barton MD. Bioboxes: standardised contain-
                                                   ers for interchangeable bioinformatics software. Gigascience. 2015; 4: 47. https://doi.org/10.1186/
                                                   s13742-015-0087-0 PMID: 26473029
                                             13.   Jordan C, Skidmore E, Dooley R. The iPlant collaborative: cyberinfrastructure for plant biology. Front
                                                   Plant Sci. journal.frontiersin.org; 2011; Available: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpls.2011.
                                                   00034/full
                                             14.   Kurtzer GM. Singularity 2.1.2—Linux application and environment containers for science [Internet].
                                                   2016.
                                             15.   Gorgolewski KJ, Auer T, Calhoun VD, Craddock RC, Das S, Duff EP, et al. The brain imaging data
                                                   structure, a format for organizing and describing outputs of neuroimaging experiments. Sci Data. 2016;
                                                   3: 160044. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.44 PMID: 27326542
                                             16.   Gorgolewski K, Burns CD, Madison C, Clark D, Halchenko YO, Waskom ML, et al. Nipype: a flexible,
                                                   lightweight and extensible neuroimaging data processing framework in python. Front Neuroinform.
                                                   2011; 5: 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2011.00013 PMID: 21897815
                                             17.   Dean J, Ghemawat S. MapReduce: simplified data processing on large clusters. Commun ACM. 2008;
                                                   51: 107.
                                             18.   Gorgolewski KJ, Storkey A, Bastin ME, Whittle IR, Wardlaw JM, Pernet CR. A test-retest fMRI dataset
                                                   for motor, language and spatial attention functions. Gigascience. 2013; 2: 6. https://doi.org/10.1186/
                                                   2047-217X-2-6 PMID: 23628139
                                             19.   Fischl B. FreeSurfer. Neuroimage. 2012; 62: 774–781. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.
                                                   021 PMID: 22248573
                                             20.   Reuter M, Schmansky NJ, Rosas HD, Fischl B. Within-Subject Template Estimation for Unbiased Lon-
                                                   gitudinal Image Analysis. Neuroimage. 2012; 61: 1402–1418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.
                                                   2012.02.084 PMID: 22430496
                                             21.   Kiar G, Gray Roncal W, Mhembere D, Bridgeford E, Burns R, Vogelstein JT. ndmg: NeuroData’s MRI
                                                   Graphs pipeline [Internet]. Zenodo; 2016.
                                             22.   Kiar G, Gorgolewski KJ, Kleissas D, Roncal WG, Litt B, Wandell B, et al. Science In the Cloud (SIC): A
                                                   use case in MRI Connectomics [Internet]. arXiv [q-bio.QM]. 2016. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.
                                                   08484
                                             23.   Eklund A, Dufort P, Villani M, Laconte S. BROCCOLI: Software for fast fMRI analysis on many-core
                                                   CPUs and GPUs. Front Neuroinform. 2014; 8: 24. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00024 PMID:
                                                   24672471
                                             24.   Raffelt DA, Smith RE, Ridgway GR, Tournier J-D, Vaughan DN, Rose S, et al. Connectivity-based fixel
                                                   enhancement: Whole-brain statistical analysis of diffusion MRI measures in the presence of crossing
                                                   fibres. Neuroimage. 2015; 117: 40–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.05.039 PMID:
                                                   26004503
                                             25.   Raffelt DA, Tournier J-D, Smith RE, Vaughan DN, Jackson G, Ridgway GR, et al. Investigating White
                                                   Matter Fibre Density and Morphology using Fixel-Based Analysis. Neuroimage. 2016;
                                             26.   Friston KJ. Statistical Parametric Mapping: The Analysis of Functional Brain Images [Internet]. Else-
                                                   vier/Academic Press; 2007. p. 647. http://books.google.com/books?id=KZZcLqkxhFIC
                                             27.   Zarrar S, Steven G, Qingyang L, Yassine B, Chaogan Y, Zhen Y, et al. The Preprocessed Connec-
                                                   tomes Project Quality Assessment Protocol—a resource for measuring the quality of MRI data. Front
                                                   Neurosci. 2015; 9.
                                             28.   Craddock C, Sikka S, Cheung B, Khanuja R, Ghosh SS, Yan C, et al. Towards Automated Analysis of
                                                   Connectomes: The Configurable Pipeline for the Analysis of Connectomes (C-PAC). Front
                                                   Neuroinform.
                                             29.   Guntupalli JS, Hanke M, Halchenko YO, Connolly AC, Ramadge PJ, Haxby JV. A Model of Representa-
                                                   tional Spaces in Human Cortex. Cereb Cortex. 2016; 26: 2919–2934. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/
                                                   bhw068 PMID: 26980615
                                             30.   Klein A, Tourville J. 101 labeled brain images and a consistent human cortical labeling protocol. Front
                                                   Neurosci. 2012; 6: 171. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2012.00171 PMID: 23227001
                                             31.   Smith RE, Tournier J-D, Calamante F, Connelly A. The effects of SIFT on the reproducibility and biologi-
                                                   cal accuracy of the structural connectome. Neuroimage. 2015; 104: 253–265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                                                   neuroimage.2014.10.004 PMID: 25312774
                                             32.   Abraham A, Pedregosa F, Eickenberg M, Gervais P, Mueller A, Kossaifi J, et al. Machine learning for
                                                   neuroimaging with scikit-learn. Front Neuroinform. 2014; 8: 14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.
                                                   00014 PMID: 24600388




PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                                   15 / 16
                                                                                                                 BIDS apps: Portable neuroimaging pipelines



                                             33.   Cusack R, Vicente-Grabovetsky A, Mitchell DJ, Wild CJ, Auer T, Linke AC, et al. Automatic analysis
                                                   (aa): efficient neuroimaging workflows and parallel processing using Matlab and XML. Front Neuroin-
                                                   form. 2014; 8: 90. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00090 PMID: 25642185
                                             34.   Bellec P, Lavoie-Courchesne S, Dickinson P, Lerch JP, Zijdenbos AP, Evans AC. The pipeline system
                                                   for Octave and Matlab (PSOM): a lightweight scripting framework and execution engine for scientific
                                                   workflows. Front Neuroinform. 2012; 6: 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2012.00007 PMID: 22493575
                                             35.   Glasser MF, Sotiropoulos SN, Wilson JA, Coalson TS, Fischl B, Andersson JL, et al. The minimal pre-
                                                   processing pipelines for the Human Connectome Project. Neuroimage. 2013; 80: 105–124. https://doi.
                                                   org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.127 PMID: 23668970
                                             36.   Smith SM, Andersson J, Auerbach EJ, Beckmann CF, Bijsterbosch J, Douaud G, et al. Resting-state
                                                   fMRI in the Human Connectome Project. Neuroimage. 2013;
                                             37.   Chen P-H (Cameron), Chen J, Yeshurun Y, Hasson U, Haxby J, Ramadge PJ. A Reduced-Dimension
                                                   fMRI Shared Response Model. In: Cortes C, Lawrence ND, Lee DD, Sugiyama M, Garnett R, editors.
                                                   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28. Curran Associates, Inc.; 2015. pp. 460–468.
                                                   http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5855-a-reduced-dimension-fmri-shared-response-model.pdf
                                             38.   Strother SC, Anderson J, Hansen LK, Kjems U, Kustra R, Sidtis J, et al. The quantitative evaluation of
                                                   functional neuroimaging experiments: the NPAIRS data analysis framework. Neuroimage. 2002; 15:
                                                   747–771. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.1034 PMID: 11906218
                                             39.   Churchill NW, Oder A, Abdi H, Tam F, Lee W, Thomas C, et al. Optimizing preprocessing and analysis
                                                   pipelines for single-subject fMRI. I. Standard temporal motion and physiological noise correction meth-
                                                   ods. Hum Brain Mapp. 2012; 33: 609–627. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.21238 PMID: 21455942
                                             40.   Churchill NW, Yourganov G, Oder A, Tam F, Graham SJ, Strother SC. Optimizing preprocessing and anal-
                                                   ysis pipelines for single-subject fMRI: 2. Interactions with ICA, PCA, task contrast and inter-subject hetero-
                                                   geneity. PLoS One. 2012; 7: e31147. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0031147 PMID: 22383999
                                             41.   Churchill NW, Spring R, Afshin-Pour B, Dong F, Strother SC. An Automated, Adaptive Framework for
                                                   Optimizing Preprocessing Pipelines in Task-Based Functional MRI. PLoS One. 2015; 10: e0131520.
                                                   https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0131520 PMID: 26161667
                                             42.   Chakravarty MM, Rapoport JL, Giedd JN, Raznahan A, Shaw P, Collins DL, et al. Striatal shape abnor-
                                                   malities as novel neurodevelopmental endophenotypes in schizophrenia: a longitudinal study. Hum
                                                   Brain Mapp. 2015; 36: 1458–1469. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22715 PMID: 25504933
                                             43.   Pipitone J, Park MTM, Winterburn J, Lett TA, Lerch JP, Pruessner JC, et al. Multi-atlas segmentation of
                                                   the whole hippocampus and subfields using multiple automatically generated templates. Neuroimage.
                                                   2014; 101: 494–512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.04.054 PMID: 24784800
                                             44.   Park MTM, Pipitone J, Baer LH, Winterburn JL, Shah Y, Chavez S, et al. Derivation of high-resolution
                                                   MRI atlases of the human cerebellum at 3T and segmentation using multiple automatically generated
                                                   templates. Neuroimage. 2014; 95: 217–231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.037 PMID:
                                                   24657354
                                             45.   Chakravarty MM, Steadman P, van Eede MC, Calcott RD, Gu V, Shaw P, et al. Performing label-fusion-
                                                   based segmentation using multiple automatically generated templates. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013; 34:
                                                   2635–2654. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22092 PMID: 22611030
                                             46.   Yendiki A, Panneck P, Srinivasan P, Stevens A, Zöllei L, Augustinack J, et al. Automated probabilistic
                                                   reconstruction of white-matter pathways in health and disease using an atlas of the underlying anatomy.
                                                   Front Neuroinform. 2011; 5: 23. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2011.00023 PMID: 22016733
                                             47.   Di Tommaso P, Palumbo E, Chatzou M, Prieto P, Heuer ML, Notredame C. The impact of Docker con-
                                                   tainers on the performance of genomic pipelines. PeerJ. 2015; 3: e1273. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.
                                                   1273 PMID: 26421241
                                             48.   Marcus DS, Olsen TR, Ramaratnam M, Buckner RL. The extensible neuroimaging archive toolkit. Neu-
                                                   roinformatics. Humana Press; 2007; 5: 11–33.
                                             49.   Sherif T, Rioux P, Rousseau M-E, Kassis N, Beck N, Adalat R, et al. CBRAIN: a web-based, distributed
                                                   computing platform for collaborative neuroimaging research. Front Neuroinform. 2014; 8: 54. https://
                                                   doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00054 PMID: 24904400
                                             50.   Glatard T, da Silva RF, Boujelben N, Adalat R, Beck N, Rioux P, et al. Boutiques: an application-sharing
                                                   system based on Linux containers. Neuroinformatics 2015.
                                             51.   Hale JS, Li L, Richardson CN, Wells GN. Containers for portable, productive and performant scientific
                                                   computing [Internet]. arXiv [cs.DC]. 2016. http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.07573
                                             52.   Esteban O., Birman D., Schaer M., Koyejo O. O., Poldrack R. A., & Gorgolewski K. J. (2017, February
                                                   24). MRIQC: Predicting Quality in Manual MRI Assessment Protocols Using No-Reference Image Qual-
                                                   ity Measures. bioRxiv. Retrieved February 27, 2017, from http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/02/24/
                                                   111294




PLOS Computational Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005209 March 9, 2017                                                                  16 / 16
