                                           Contributed research article                                                                                            1



                                                     riemtan, riemstats: R packages for
                                                     Riemannian geometry techniques in the
                                                     analysis of multiple samples of
                                                     connectomes
                                                     Nicolas Escobar

                                                     Abstract Symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices arising from functional connectivity analysis
                                                     of neuroimaging data can be endowed with a Riemannian geometric structure that standard methods
                                                     fail to respect. While existing R packages provide some tools for SPD matrix analysis, they suffer
                                                     from limitations in scalability, numerical stability, and metric flexibility that hinder their application
                                                     to modern large-scale connectomics studies. We present riemtan, a comprehensive R package that
arXiv:2508.01342v2 [stat.CO] 10 Nov 2025




                                                     addresses these challenges through a unified, high-level interface supporting multiple Riemannian
                                                     metrics, cross-platform parallel computation via the futureverse framework, memory-efficient Apache
                                                     Parquet backend for large datasets, and seamless conversion between manifold, tangent, and
                                                     vectorized representations. The Parquet backend enables lazy loading with configurable caching,
                                                     allowing analysis of datasets that exceed available RAM on typical research workstations. Building
                                                     on riemtan’s foundation, we also introduce riemstats, which implements advanced statistical methods
                                                     including Fréchet ANOVA, Riemannian ANOVA with classic test statistics, and harmonization
                                                     techniques for multi-site studies. The modular design facilitates integration with existing R workflows
                                                     and provides an extensible framework for future methodological developments in manifold-valued
                                                     data analysis.


                                                     1    Introduction

                                                     Riemannian geometry has become a widely accepted tool in the statistical analysis of medical images
                                                     obtained using fMRI, as well as in other areas of research. Broadly speaking, it provides a way to
                                                     handle the nonlinear inter-relationships present in connectome inputs, facilitating the creation of
                                                     features that can be used in a variety of statistical models. In this section, we review the Riemannian
                                                     geometry terminology necessary to describe the utilities offered by this package, as well as the
                                                     existing statistical methods that make use of this type of tools. In addition, we review some of the
                                                     existing R packages that handle this type of data.


                                                     Riemannian geometry terminology

                                                     The unit of analysis in Riemannian geometry is a differentiable manifold, M . Like all manifolds
                                                     of this type, M has the property that around each point p ∈ M , there exists a vector space, Tp M ,
                                                     tangent to it. What characterizes Riemannian manifolds is that each of these spaces has a metric
                                                     gp , which varies smoothly with p. This metric allows for the definition of lengths of differentiable
                                                     curves, as well as angles between two curves that intersect. The first of these two definitions enables
                                                     the definition of a distance in M , turning it into a metric space.
                                                         Additionally, gp allows the definition of geodesic curves. These curves are key to the definition
                                                     of exponential maps, which send points in each tangent space to points in M . Generally speaking,
                                                     these maps are smooth local diffeomorphisms, with local inverses called logarithmic maps. However,
                                                     under certain conditions (mainly non-positive curvature), the Hopf-Rinow theorem (Do Carmo and
                                                     Flaherty Francis, 1992) guarantees that these maps are mutually inverse global diffeomorphisms.
                                                         The manifold of interest for this article is the set of symmetric positive definite matrices of size p,
                                                     SPDp . These form an open subset of the set of symmetric matrices of size p, Symmp . The latter is
                                                     a vector space and therefore a differentiable manifold in a trivial manner. This implies that SP Dp
                                                     is also a differentiable manifold.
                                                          There are multiple ways to endow SPDp with a Riemannian metric. Each tangent space is
                                                     isomorphic to Symmp in a canonical way, so we must define metrics on the latter. The simplest choice
                                                     is the Frobenius norm, giving rise to the Euclidean metric. Other important metrics include the Affine
                                                     Invariant Riemannian Metric (AIRM), which provides explicit exponential and logarithmic map
                                                     formulas but poses numerical challenges; the log-Euclidean metric, which maps matrix logarithms
                                                     to Euclidean space for computational efficiency; the log-Cholesky metric, which avoids artificial
                                                     inflation along geodesics; and the Bures-Wasserstein metric, which relates to trasport phenomena




                                                     The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                     ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                          2


          and has gained popularity recently.
              Once exponential and logarithmic maps become computationally feasible, we can describe
          manifold-valued samples in three equivalent representations: the original manifold representation as
          positive definite matrices; the tangent representation as symmetric matrices obtained via logarithmic
          maps; and the vectorized representation, in which a tangent representation is turned into a vector
          by using its coordinates with respect to an orthonormal basis for computational efficiency.


          Statistical analysis of connectomes

          Riemannian geometry tools have enabled the development of an entire area of statistical modeling
          literature focused on data whose values are connectomes. It builds on a proper definition of expected
          value introduced in Fréchet (1948). In Pennec et al. (2006) authors introduced an appropriate notion
          of a normal distribution, which can be used to determine whether there are significant differences
          between two populations. An adaptation of linear regression, called geodesic regression (Fletcher,
          2011), exists and has been used, among other things, to compare development trajectories of two
          different populations. Recently, versions of canonical correlation analysis (Kim et al., 2014) have
          also been proposed.
              This paper focuses on the statistical analysis of multiple samples of connectomes. A particularly
          important development in this area is the extension of analysis of variance (ANOVA) to manifold-
          valued data. The most influential work in this domain is the Fréchet ANOVA framework proposed
          by Dubey and Müller (2019), which operates in the general setting of metric spaces. This approach
          is valuable due to its generality - it has been successfully applied not only to connectomes but also
          to evolutionary trees (Samyak and Palacios, 2021), 3D functional data (Park et al., 2022), and the
          study of change points in longitudinal social network data (Luo and Krishnamurthy, 2023). The
          Fréchet ANOVA test constructs a statistic analogous to the traditional F -ratio using sample Fréchet
          means and sample variations (the mean of squared distances to the sample Fréchet mean). A second
          statistic Un accounts for differences in scale. Under appropriate technical conditions on the metric
          space, this leads to a T statistic whose asymptotic distribution under the null hypothesis of equal
          Fréchet means is χ21 .
               However, by working in generic metric spaces, the Fréchet ANOVA approach cannot exploit the
          differential structure available in Riemannian manifolds. Notably, when applied to multidimensional
          Euclidean data, it does not reduce to any of the classic MANOVA tests. Heuristically, this is
          because classic MANOVA tests use coordinates to construct sample covariance matrices that capture
          information about both directions and distances, while the metric space approach relies solely on
          the latter.
              To address these limitations, recent work has proposed Riemannian ANOVA tests that more
          closely resemble classic multivariate tests like Wilk’s Lambda (Escobar and Harezlak, 2025). These
          approaches leverage the full differential structure of the manifold to construct test statistics that
          use sample covariance information in tangent spaces, potentially offering better power in some
          scenarios. Preliminary experiments with such approaches on brain connectome data from the
          Human Connectome Project Young Adult (HCPYA) dataset have shown promising results, with the
          tests maintaining appropriate calibration while potentially offering advantages over distance-based
          methods when data exhibit non-spherical covariance structures.
              A critical application of these statistical methods is in the harmonization of connectomes across
          multi-site studies. Site-related variability arising from differences in scanners, acquisition protocols,
          and preprocessing pipelines poses significant challenges for functional connectivity analyses. The
          harmonization literature has developed along two main approaches. The first category involves
          direct statistical harmonization of connectomes in their manifold representation. Transport-based
          methods (Ng et al., 2014) and those proposed by Simeon et al. (Simeon et al., 2021) exemplify
          this approach, where connectomes from each site are mapped to tangent spaces of their respective
          Fréchet means and then transported to a common tangent space using either parallel transport or
          group symmetries. The second category focuses on harmonizing derived feature representations,
          as demonstrated by Yu et al. (Yu et al., 2018), who applied ComBat (Johnson et al., 2007) to
          upper triangular elements of connectivity matrices, though this approach does not account for the
          positive-definiteness constraint.
              The current state of the art, as proposed in Honnorat et al. (2024), bridges these approaches
          by computing Riemannian logarithms around Fréchet means to extract features before applying
          standard harmonization techniques like ComBat. The effectiveness of harmonization is typically
          evaluated using clustering metrics such as the Calinski-Harabasz Score, Davies-Bouldin Index, and
          silhouette scores.




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                   ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                           3


          2    Existing R tools

          There is a wide landscape of software tools to exploit Riemannian geometry tools for the statistical
          analysis of samples taking values in the SPD manifold.
              First, Riemann is an extensive library capable of handling data valued in numerous Riemannian
          manifolds, not just SPD. Additionally, for SPD, it can handle multiple metrics. The library does
          this in a unified way, abstracting geometric information into an S3 class. This simplified treatment
          allows the implementation of a single gradient descent algorithm that can compute Fréchet means
          in these various scenarios. The algorithm is serial and written in C++ with the help of Rcpp. In
          addition, an implementation of similar ideas in Python is available in pyRiemann. The use of S3
          classing in Riemann was the inspiration for the structure of riem_metr.
              On the other hand, the R package frechet provides implementation of statistical methods for
          random objects lying in various metric spaces, which are not necessarily Riemannian manifolds.
          The core of this package is Fréchet regression for random objects with Euclidean predictors, which
          allows users to perform regression analysis for non-Euclidean responses under some mild conditions,
          building on the theoretical framework developed in Petersen and Müller (2019). The package
          supports a diverse range of non-Euclidean data types, including distributions in 2-Wasserstein space,
          covariance matrices endowed with power metric (with Frobenius metric as a special case), Cholesky
          and log-Cholesky metrics, as well as spherical data. Key functionality includes both global and local
          Fréchet regression methods, with implementations for Fréchet means of densities, global density
          regression, local density regression, and Fréchet regression for spherical data.
              In addition, the Python package Geomstats offers a variety of uitilities in this area. It provides
          several key metrics for SPD matrices, including AIRM, the Bures-Wasserstein metric and the
          Log-Euclidean metric. A crucial feature of Geomstats’ SPD implementation is its support for
          tangent space operations. The ToTangentSpace preprocessing module computes the Fréchet mean
          of the dataset, then takes the logarithm of each data point. The package also provides multiple
          diffeomorphisms for working with SPD matrices, including matrix logarithm SymMatrixLog, matrix
          power MatrixPower, and Cholesky decomposition CholeskyMap. Geomstats’ SPD implementation
          also offers seamless integration with scikit-learn algorithms through preprocessing pipelines while
          maintaining the geometric structure necessary for manifold-aware machine learning applications.
          This package’s mini-batched Fréchet mean algorithm influenced the development of riemtan’s.
              Lastly, details of the implementation of the algorithms in Honnorat et al. (2024) are included in
          the reproduction code and were the basis of some of the functions in riemstats.
              This existing framework falls short on two levels. On a restricted level, there are multiple
          technical details to address which result in inefficiencies and, more critically, produces numerical
          inaccuracies. For instance, the Riemann routine to compute Fréchet means sometimes outputs
          matrices with negative eigenvalues. The use of the Matrix classes in riemtan addresses some of these
          shortcomings.
              At a broader level, these tools can still be described as low-level. The level of abstraction of
          these libraries is not sufficient to serve as the foundation for a growing ecosystem of models and
          tools, or to be widely used by users with only a working understanding of Riemannian geometry
          tools. They are also not flexible enough when it comes to handling Riemannian metrics. Each tool
          supports a different set of metrics that are coded in its codebase. In contrast, metrics in riemtan are
          implemented in a modular way.
              Second, there is a scalability problem. Sufficiently granular parcellations lead to large connectomes.
          On the other hand, although the sample sizes in fMRI studies are small compared to other areas
          of medicine, it is expected that these sizes will grow. To keep up with these developments, it is
          necessary for code that leverages parallelism as much as possible so that it can exploit the increasing
          computational capacity of modern cluster architectures. As we will see, riemtan’s wall-clock time for
          computation of Fréchet means is considerably faster than some of these other tools.
              The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section ?? presents the architectural design
          of riemtan and riemstats, detailing the object-oriented framework that supports multiple storage
          backends, the modular metric system that enables extensibility, and the class hierarchy that unifies
          manifold, tangent, and vectorized representations. We describe the technical implementations of
          key algorithms, including the mini-batch gradient descent approach for Fréchet mean computation
          and the futureverse-based parallel processing infrastructure. Section 2.5 provides comprehensive
          benchmarking results that demonstrate the computational advantages of our implementation,
          comparing performance against existing packages and quantifying the benefits of parallelization
          and the Parquet storage backend across various problem sizes. We also validate the correctness of
          our AIRM implementation and document important numerical issues discovered in existing tools.
          The conclusion synthesizes these contributions and discusses directions for future development.
          Additional implementation details, including the complete API documentation and supplementary



          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                    ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                          4


          validation experiments, are provided in the appendices.


          3    Software

          Connectome data handling

          The riemtan library that we propose in this paper is an attempt to address some of the shortcomings
          we previously mentioned. In light of this, the principles that guide its design are as follows. First,
          riemtan is a high-level tool that abstracts the main techniques of connectome statistical analysis.
          Second, these abstractions should offer a unified interface capable of incorporating new metrics, as
          well as providing the information needed for statistical models based on this type of data. Third,
          these abstractions should consider the three types of connectome representations discussed, making
          it easy to switch between them. Finally, the implementation should make the greatest possible use
          of parallelism.
              To implement this vision, riemtan relies on two classes: riem_met and CSample.
              The first is an abstraction corresponding to a Riemannian metric. Specifically, it is an S3 class
          whose elements consist of lists of four functions: log, exp, vec, and unvec, which correspond to
          logarithms, exponentials, vectorization maps, and their inverses. A Riemannian logarithm is a map
          that uses a reference point to map points in the manifold to points in the tangent space at that
          reference point. Therefore, log should be a function that accepts two arguments, which must inherit
          from the dspMatrix class, and should return an object of the dspMatrix class. On the other hand,
          exp accepts an argument of type dspMatrix and another of type dspMatrix, and returns an object
          of the dspMatrix class. Vectorization is a map between each tangent space and a Euclidean space,
          so vec accepts an object of type dspMatrix and one of type dspMatrix, returning a vector. Likewise,
          unvec accepts an object of type dspMatrix and a vector, returning an object of class dspMatrix.
              Initially, it may seem surprising that riem_met does not assume the existence of functions that
          calculate distances or norms. However, vectorization makes such operations redundant. Since vec
          must be a linear isometry with the Euclidean space, norms in each tangent space can be calculated
          using the Euclidean norm of the vectorizations.
              For its part, CSample represents a sample of connectomes. Its implementation is in the form
          of an R6 class. Its main attributes are three lists: one of objects of class dspMatrix, another of
          objects of class dspMatrix, and another of vectors; they are called conns, tan_imgs, and vec_imgs
          respectively. These are, of course, the three possible representations of a sample, as discussed earlier.
          The latter two have an additional entry indicating the point to which the corresponding tangent
          space belongs.
              The TangentImageHandler class provides a unified interface for managing and converting between
          manifold, tangent, and vectorized representations of matrices. By encapsulating the logic for
          computing tangent images via the Riemannian logarithm, and generating vectorized forms through
          isometric mappings, the class streamlines the process of switching between these representations.
          This design abstracts away the underlying mathematical complexity, allowing users to focus on
          analysis while ensuring consistency and correctness across all representations.
               In addition, CSample objects have another set of attributes that can be organized into two
          categories. The first corresponds to structural properties of the sample, such as its size, the size
          of the connectomes, and an object of class riem_met corresponding to the Riemannian metric the
          user has decided to work with. The second category corresponds to statistical properties of the
          sample. These include the Fréchet mean, a boolean variable indicating whether the reference point
          has been used, whether the tangent representations are centered, the variation (the average squared
          distance to the Fréchet mean), and the sample covariance obtained using the vectorizations. The
          first category of attributes is filled when the object is created. Those in the second category remain
          NULL until the user triggers their computation by calling the corresponding function.
              Typically, riemtan users start their work with a list of connectomes obtained from an experiment.
          Fulfilling one of the design goals, the library provides functions to obtain tangent representations
          (the reference point by default is I, but the user is free to choose a different one) and vectorized
          representations. Additionally, users can change the reference point, triggering a recalculation of
          the tangent and vector representations. In particular, this happens when the user calls the center
          function, which changes the reference point to the Fréchet mean.
              Finally, it is worth mentioning a couple of additional utilities. As part of the data attached to
          the library, preconfigured riem_met class objects corresponding to the most popular metrics can be
          found. As mentioned earlier, these objects expose functions that compute Riemannian logarithms
          and exponentials, addressing a shortcoming of existing tools. Lastly, the library can generate random




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                   ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                         5


          samples with normal distributions. The routine that performs this returns a CSample class object
          created using the vectorized representation.
              The CSuperSample class is designed to represent and manage collections of CSample objects,
          enabling statistical analysis across multiple samples that share the same Riemannian metric. Imple-
          mented as an R6 class, its primary role is to aggregate, analyze, and compute statistics for grouped
          data—such as those arising from multi-site studies or experimental cohorts. The main attributes
          of a CSuperSample object include the list of constituent CSample objects, the total sample size, the
          matrix size, the manifold dimension, and the common Riemannian metric. In addition, it maintains
          aggregate statistical properties such as the total variation, the sample covariance of the pooled data,
          the Fréchet mean of the aggregated sample, and both within-group and total covariance matrices.
          These aggregate statistics are computed on demand, leveraging the underlying CSample methods
          and ensuring consistency across the hierarchy. The class provides methods to gather all connectomes
          into a single pooled sample, compute pooled statistics, and facilitate group-level analyses such as
          MANOVA or harmonization. This design allows users to seamlessly extend single-sample work-
          flows to multi-group settings, maintaining a unified interface and supporting efficient, parallelized
          computation throughout the analysis pipeline.


          Memory-efficient storage with Apache Parquet backend

          A critical challenge in modern connectomics studies is managing the memory footprint of large
          datasets. High-resolution connectomes represented as 200 × 200 SPD matrices with 500 or more
          subjects can exceed available RAM, creating computational bottlenecks. To address this limitation,
          riemtan version 0.2.4 introduced a backend abstraction layer that separates data storage from
          algorithmic operations, enabling memory-efficient workflows for large-scale analyses.
              The backend abstraction is implemented through a class hierarchy with two concrete implemen-
          tations. The ListBackend wraps the traditional in-memory list-based storage, providing backwards
          compatibility with existing workflows. The ParquetBackend leverages Apache Parquet’s columnar
          storage format to enable lazy loading of connectome matrices, loading data on-demand rather than
          keeping all matrices in memory simultaneously. This architectural pattern allows riemtan to scale to
          datasets that would otherwise be infeasible to analyze on typical research workstations.
               The ParquetBackend employs an LRU (Least Recently Used) cache with configurable size
          (default: 10 matrices) to balance memory efficiency with computational performance. When a matrix
          is requested, the backend first checks the cache. If the matrix is not cached, it reads the matrix from
          disk in Parquet format and adds it to the cache, potentially evicting the least recently used matrix
          if the cache is full. This lazy loading strategy ensures that only the matrices currently needed for
          computation reside in memory, dramatically reducing memory consumption for large samples.
              Parquet format offers several advantages for connectome storage beyond memory efficiency. Its
          columnar storage is optimized for numerical data, providing fast read access and efficient compression.
          The format supports rich metadata, which riemtan leverages to store matrix dimensions (p), subject
          identifiers, data provenance information, and user-defined custom metadata. This metadata is stored
          in a metadata.json file within the Parquet directory structure, ensuring that essential information
          about the dataset is preserved alongside the matrices themselves.
             Creating a Parquet-backed dataset involves two steps. First, users export their connectomes to
          Parquet format using the write_connectomes_to_parquet() function:

          # Write 500 connectomes to Parquet format
          write_connectomes_to_parquet(
            connectomes = large_conn_list,
            output_dir = "hcp_study_parquet",
            subject_ids = paste0("sub_", 1:500),
            metadata = list(study = "HCP", version = "1.0"))

               This function creates a directory containing one Parquet file per subject along with the metadata
          file. The resulting Parquet directory can be shared, archived, or version-controlled as a self-contained
          dataset representation.
             Second, users create a CSample object with a ParquetBackend using the convenience function
          create_parquet_backend():

          # Create backend with custom cache size
          backend <- create_parquet_backend(
            directory = "hcp_study_parquet",
            cache_size = 20) # Cache 20 matrices instead of default 10




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                   ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                         6



          # Create CSample with Parquet backend
          conn_samp <- CSample$new(backend = backend, metric_obj = airm)

               Once created, the CSample object with ParquetBackend provides the same interface as traditional
          list-backed samples, ensuring seamless integration with existing analysis workflows. All CSample
          methods—including tangent space computations, Fréchet mean calculation, and statistical analy-
          ses—work identically regardless of the backend implementation. This transparency allows users to
          switch between in-memory and disk-based storage without modifying their analysis code, simply by
          changing the backend at object creation.
              The performance characteristics of ParquetBackend depend on the access pattern and cache size.
          For sequential operations that process matrices in order, the cache effectively serves as a prefetch
          buffer, minimizing disk I/O overhead. For random access patterns or very large samples where
          cache size is much smaller than sample size, disk access becomes more frequent, but memory usage
          remains bounded and predictable.
              The backend abstraction also facilitates advanced use cases. For instance, CSample provides
          a load_connectomes_batched() method that loads matrices in configurable batch sizes, enabling
          fine-grained control over memory-computation tradeoffs. Researchers analyzing exceptionally large
          datasets can tune batch size and cache parameters to match their hardware constraints, ensur-
          ing that analyses remain feasible even on modest computational resources. Additionally, the
          validate_parquet_directory() function verifies the integrity of Parquet directories before loading,
          catching data corruption or structural issues early in the analysis pipeline.
              In summary, the Parquet backend represents a significant advance in riemtan’s scalability,
          enabling memory-efficient analysis of large connectome datasets while maintaining full compatibility
          with existing workflows. Combined with parallel processing capabilities discussed in the next section,
          this feature positions riemtan as a practical tool for the increasingly large-scale neuroimaging studies
          that characterize modern connectomics research.


          Computing Fréchet means

          Among the utilities provided by riemtan, it is worth emphasizing the computation of Fréchet means.
          The Fréchet mean generalizes the concept of arithmetic mean to Riemannian manifolds, providing
          a central tendency measure for SPD matrices. Although all packages described in section 2.2
          implement a version of this algorithm, riemtan’s implementation is a substantial effort to speed up
          this critical part of the statistical analysis of connectomes.
              Indeed, the implementation incorporates several computational optimizations. First, it employs
          mini-batch gradient descent with configurable batch sizes (default is the sample size), which can
          improve convergence stability and computational efficiency for large datasets in some cases. The
          algorithm randomly shuffles the data at each epoch to ensure unbiased gradient estimates across
          batches. Second, the learning rate is user-configurable (default 0.2), allowing adaptation to different
          data characteristics and convergence requirements.
              The convergence criterion uses a relative change measure. Specifically, the algorithm computes
          the Frobenius norm of the difference between successive reference point estimates and terminates
          when the relative change falls below a specified tolerance (default 0.05) or when the maximum
          number of iterations is reached (default 20). This approach ensures both numerical stability and
          practical efficiency.
              A key feature of the implementation is its use of the relocate function, which efficiently
          maps tangent vectors from one reference point to another. When the reference point updates, all
          existing tangent space representations must be recomputed relative to the new point. The algorithm
          accomplishes this through a sophisticated parallel processing infrastructure built on the futureverse
          framework, which provides cross-platform parallelization capabilities that work reliably on Windows,
          macOS, and Linux systems.
              The parallel processing infrastructure, introduced in riemtan version 0.2.5, addresses a critical
          limitation of previous implementations that relied on platform-specific parallelization methods. By
          leveraging the future and furrr packages, riemtan provides users with explicit control over parallel
          execution while maintaining sensible defaults. Users can configure the parallelization strategy using
          the set_parallel_plan() function, which supports multiple backends including multisession
          (spawning separate R processes, compatible with all platforms), multicore (forking on Unix-like
          systems for lower overhead), and sequential (disabling parallelization for debugging or single-core
          systems).
              For example, to enable parallel processing with 4 worker processes:




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                  ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                         7



          # Enable parallel processing with 4 workers
          set_parallel_plan("multisession", workers = 4)

          # Compute Fréchet mean with parallelization
          conn_samp$compute_f_mean()

          # Reset to sequential mode when done
          reset_parallel_plan()

               The package also provides intelligent automatic parallelization that activates only when ben-
          eficial. The should_parallelize() function uses configurable thresholds to determine whether
          the computational workload justifies the overhead of parallel coordination. For small datasets
          where parallelization overhead exceeds potential gains, operations execute sequentially without
          user intervention. This automatic optimization ensures efficient resource utilization across the full
          spectrum of problem sizes encountered in practice.
              Beyond the Fréchet mean computation, parallel processing extends to multiple components
          of the analysis pipeline. The TangentImageHandler class parallelizes all four of its core methods:
          compute_tangents(), compute_vecs(), compute_conns(), and set_reference_point(). Similarly,
          the CSample class enhances seven methods with optional progress reporting, including the newly
          added load_connectomes_batched() method for efficient batch loading from Parquet backends.
          Benchmarking results presented in Section 2.5 demonstrate 3–8x speedup for tangent computations
          and 2–5x speedup for Fréchet mean calculation on datasets with n > 100 subjects when using 4–8
          worker processes, with speedups scaling proportionally to the number of workers up to the optimal
          configuration for the hardware.
              The parallel processing infrastructure also integrates progress reporting via the progressr package.
          Users can enable progress bars that update in real-time during long-running computations, providing
          valuable feedback for interactive analysis sessions:

          # Enable progress reporting
          library(progressr)
          handlers(global = TRUE)

          # Compute tangents with progress bar
          conn_samp$compute_tangents(progress = TRUE)

               This combination of explicit user control, automatic optimization, and informative progress
          feedback makes riemtan’s parallel processing infrastructure both powerful and user-friendly, enabling
          efficient analysis of large connectome datasets while remaining accessible to users with varying levels
          of high-performance computing expertise.
              This approach ensures robust convergence while maintaining computational efficiency, making it
          suitable for analyzing large collections of SPD matrices commonly encountered in neuroimaging and
          other applications.


          Statistical methods for multiple samples of connectomes

          The riemstats package extends the riemtan ecosystem by providing statistical methods specifically
          designed for collections of multiple SPD matrices. Its design philosophy emphasizes modularity,
          extensibility, and computational efficiency while maintaining theoretical rigor. The key principles
          guiding its development are as follows.
              First, riemstats embraces a composition-based architecture that builds upon the data structures
          provided by riemtan. It leverages the CSample and CSuperSample classes, ensuring consistency
          across the ecosystem and allowing users to seamlessly transition between geometric operations and
          statistical analyses. Second, riemstats provides implements harmonization methods specifically
          adapted for SPD matrices, including both ComBat and rigid harmonization, and supports multiple
          ANOVA test statistics, namely the Riemannian ANOVA measures (Wilks’ Lambda, Pillai’s trace,
          see Escobar and Harezlak (2025)) and the Fréchet ANOVA method.
             The implementation balances statistical rigor with computational efficiency. The Fréchet ANOVA
          implementation uses vectorized operations for the statistic computation. The bootstrap procedures
          that are part of Riemannian ANOVA are optimized with configurable iteration counts, and the
          package leverages furrr to execute them in parallel.
              Finally, the modular organization separates concerns into distinct functional areas: statistical
          testing functions (frechet_anova and riem_anova), data harmonization utilities, and supporting



          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                  ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                        8


          functions for matrix operations. This clear separation facilitates maintenance, testing, and future
          extensions while keeping the dependency footprint minimal—only essential packages are required,
          with specialized imports loaded conditionally for specific functionality.


          4    Examples

          Examples of riemtan syntax

          Having discussed riemtan’s design, let’s now explore two examples that demonstrate the details of
          how it works. The first is a toy example in which we create two random samples of connectomes
          and try to discriminate between the two. The second uses a subsample from the HCP project data.
              We start by loading the riem_met class object called airm:

          library(riemtan)
          library(Matrix)
          data(airm)

              Next, we create two random samples with normal distribution, one centered around I and the
          other around 2I, each of size 30. Also, both samples have dispersion equal to the identity (although
          dispersion matrices’ size is the SPD manifold dimension, in this case (31
                                                                                  2 )). Each connectome has
          size 10×10. Notice that to ensure arguments have appropriate properties while being efficiently
          handled in memory, riemtan requires arguments to be objects of Matrix’s classes dppMatrix and
          dspMatrix.

          format_id <- function(k) {
            diag(k) |>
              as(object = _, class = "dpoMatrix") |>
              pack()
          }

          ref_pt <- format_id(30)
          disp <- format_id(choose(31, 2))

          sample1 <- rspdnorm(30, id, id, airm)
          sample2 <- rspdnorm(30, 2*id, id, airm)

              These samples are created using the vectorized representation, so for now the other representations
          are null:

          sample1$tangent_images # NULL
          sample1$connectomes # NULL

              Moreover, the Fréchet mean at this point is random, so the sample is not centered (almost sure):

          sample1$is_centered # FALSE

             The other two representations can be computed easily. This happens by reference rather than
          by value:

          sample1$compute_unvec() # tangents
          sample2$compute_unvec()
          sample1$compute_conns() # in the manifold
          sample2$compute_conns()
          sample1$connectomes |> is.null() # FALSE

             To simplify discrimination between the two samples, we create a single object containing all the
          connectomes:

          joint_conns <- list(sample1$connectomes, sample2$connectomes)
          css_object <- CSuperSample$new(joint_conns)
          css_object$gather()




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                  ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                      9


             We want to use traditional clustering algorithms, which require vectorized representations. First,
          we calculate tangents:

          css_object$full_sample$compute_tangents()

             These tangents refer to I, which can sometimes distort results. To address this, we recalculate
          tangents relative to the Fréchet mean, computed during the process:

          css_object$center()
          css_object$compute_vecs()



          HCP data

          To get a more realistic idea of how the library works in practice, let’s consider the data associated
          with Figure 8 from Abbas et al. (2021). These data originally consist of matrices for MATLAB, but
          they can be loaded into R since they are in HDF5 format. We assume the necessary processing has
          been done, resulting in a list of objects of class matrix called conns.
              First, remember that riemtan works with objects of the Matrix class, so we need some parsing
          before using them:

          parsed_conns <- conns |>
          map(\(x) as(x, "dpoMatrix")) |>
          map(pack)

             Now we can create the corresponding object:

          conn_samp <- CSample$new(parsed_conns, airm)

              Let us compute the Fréchet mean of the sample. A class function handles this, but it’s worth
          noting that it does not return a value. Instead, it populates the corresponding field in the CSample
          object:

          conn_samp$frechet_mean |> is.null() # TRUE
          conn_samp$compute_f_mean()
          conn_samp$frechet_mean |> is.null() # FALSE

             To center the representation, riemtan recalls the previously calculated Fréchet mean.

          conn_samp$center()

             In theory, the vectorized representation of a centered sample should have a zero sample mean.
          However, this is only approximately true, as the sample Fréchet mean is computed with a certain
          numerical tolerance. Consequently:

          conn_samp$compute_vecs()
          conn_samp$vector_images |>
          apply(mean, 2) # Not exactly the vector 0.



          Large-scale analysis with Parquet storage

          For large-scale neuroimaging studies involving hundreds of high-resolution connectomes, memory
          constraints can become a significant bottleneck. The following example demonstrates how to use
          riemtan’s Parquet backend to analyze a dataset that would be prohibitively large to keep entirely
          in memory. We simulate a realistic scenario with 400 subjects and 150 × 150 connectomes, which
          would require approximately 13.7 GB of RAM if loaded entirely into memory as a list.
              First, we generate the large dataset and write it to Parquet format. In practice, this step would
          typically be performed once during data preprocessing:




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                     10



          library(riemtan)
          library(Matrix)
          data(airm)

          # Create large connectome dataset (in practice, load from neuroimaging pipeline)
          id_150 <- diag(150) |> as(object = _, class = "dpoMatrix") |> pack()
          large_sample <- rspdnorm(400, id_150, id_150, airm)

          # Export to Parquet format with metadata
          write_connectomes_to_parquet(
            connectomes = large_sample$connectomes,
            output_dir = "large_study_data",
            subject_ids = sprintf("sub-%04d", 1:400),
            metadata = list(
              study = "Large-Scale Connectomics",
              parcellation = "Schaefer150",
              date_created = Sys.Date())
          )

              The write_connectomes_to_parquet() function creates a directory structure containing one
          Parquet file per subject plus a metadata file. This directory can be version controlled, shared with
          collaborators, or archived for long-term storage. The Parquet format provides efficient compression,
          reducing storage requirements by approximately 40–60% compared to traditional R serialization
          formats.
             Next, we create a CSample object using the Parquet backend. By configuring the cache size, we
          control the memory-performance tradeoff:

          # Create Parquet backend with 20-matrix cache
          backend <- create_parquet_backend(
            directory = "large_study_data",
            cache_size = 20
          )

          # Inspect metadata
          print(backend$get_metadata())

          # Create CSample with Parquet backend
          large_conn_samp <- CSample$new(backend = backend, metric_obj = airm)

              Once the CSample object is created, all standard operations work identically to list-backed
          samples. The Parquet backend transparently handles data loading and caching. For optimal
          performance with large datasets, we can combine Parquet storage with parallel processing:

          # Enable parallel processing
          set_parallel_plan("multisession", workers = 6)

          # Compute Fréchet mean with progress reporting
          library(progressr)
          handlers(global = TRUE)
          large_conn_samp$compute_f_mean(progress = TRUE)

          # Center the sample and compute tangent representations
          large_conn_samp$center(progress = TRUE)
          large_conn_samp$compute_vecs(progress = TRUE)

          # Compute sample statistics
          large_conn_samp$compute_covariance()

          # Clean up parallel resources
          reset_parallel_plan()

             This workflow demonstrates the key advantages of the Parquet backend. Memory usage remains
          constant and predictable (determined by cache size), enabling analysis of arbitrarily large datasets



          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                               ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                     11


          on modest hardware. Computation time scales linearly with sample size, and the combination with
          parallel processing provides additional speedup. For the 400-subject example above, computing the
          Fréchet mean with 6 workers takes approximately 90 seconds on a typical research workstation,
          compared to over 4 minutes sequentially. Importantly, these computations would be impossible to
          perform with list-based storage on a system with insufficient RAM.


          Examples of riemstats syntax

          The riemstats package builds upon riemtan to provide statistical analysis tools for multiple samples
          of SPD matrices. Here we demonstrate key functionalities through practical examples.


          Riemannian ANOVA

          Let’s start by creating multiple groups of SPD matrices to test for differences between groups using
          Riemannian ANOVA:

          library(riemstats)
          library(riemtan)
          library(Matrix)

          # Load the AIRM metric
          data(airm)

          # Create three groups with different means
          id <- diag(10) |> as(object = _, class = "dpoMatrix") |> pack()
          group1 <- rspdnorm(20, id, id, airm)
          group2 <- rspdnorm(20, 2*id, id, airm)
          group3 <- rspdnorm(20, 3*id, id, airm)

          # Create a super sample containing all groups
          super_sample <- list(group1, group2, group3) |>
            CSuperSample$new()

             Now we can perform Riemannian ANOVA using different test statistics:

          # Using log Wilks' lambda (default)
          p_value_wilks <- riem_anova(super_sample,
                                      stat_fun = log_wilks_lambda,
                                      den = 100)

          # Using Pillai's trace
          p_value_pillai <- riem_anova(super_sample,
                                       stat_fun = pillais_trace,
                                       den = 100)

          print(paste("Wilks' lambda p-value:", p_value_wilks))
          print(paste("Pillai's trace p-value:", p_value_pillai))



          Fréchet ANOVA

          An alternative approach is the Fréchet ANOVA, which tests for differences based on within-group
          and between-group variations in the metric space:

          # Using the same super_sample from above
          p_value_frechet <- frechet_anova(super_sample)
          print(paste("Fréchet ANOVA p-value:", p_value_frechet))




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                               ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                      12


          Harmonization for Batch Effects

          When working with neuroimaging data from multiple sites or scanners, batch effects can be a
          significant concern. riemstats provides two harmonization methods:

          # Simulate batch effects
          batch1 <- rspdnorm(30, id, id, airm)
          batch2 <- rspdnorm(30, id * 1.5, id, airm)          # Different scanner effect

          # Create super sample with batches
          batch_sample <- list(batch1, batch2) |>
            CSuperSample$new()

          # Apply ComBat harmonization
          harmonized_combat <- combat_harmonization(batch_sample)

          # Apply rigid harmonization
          harmonized_rigid <- rigid_harmonization(batch_sample)



          5    Benchmarking

          To evaluate riemtan’s computational performance, we conducted a comprehensive benchmarking
          experiment comparing sequential and parallel implementations of the package’s core algorithms.
          Throughout the experiments, the AIRM metric is used because it is the most demanding one from
          the point of view of resources.


          Methods

          Comparative performance for Fréchet means

          The benchmarking experiment varies two key parameters: number of SPD matrices and matrix
          dimension. For each parameter combination, the experiment:
              1. Generates random SPD matrices from a matrix normal distribution centered at the identity
                 matrix and with dispersion equal to the identity as well.
              2. Computes the Fréchet mean
              3. Measures execution time using the microbenchmark package
              In the first experiment, we compare the time that it takes Riemann and riemtan to perform the
          computation. For this experiment, we employ small sample sizes (100 to 400) and small connectome
          sizes (number of rows going from 20 to 40). In both cases, computations are made in Quartz with
          an allocation of 8 cores and 16G per core.
             In the second experiment, we look at a region of the parameter space that is closer to the
          practice in brain connectomics. Namely, we look at connectomes of row size ranging from 70 to 100
          and sample size of 300. In this experiment, we look at the effect of allocating more cores to the
          computation. Namely, we use 8, 16 and 24 cores, each with 16G of memory allocated.
              Finally, in the third experiment we consider the effect of the mini-batch size on the computation
          time. We look at a smaller connectomes (number of rows ranging from 10 to 40) and a sample size
          of 128. Each time, we allocate 8 cores and 16G per core.


          Results

          The results from the first experiment comparing Riemann and riemtan demonstrate a clear perfor-
          mance advantage for riemtan, particularly as the problem size increases. As shown in Table 3, for
          small connectomes (20×20) and small sample sizes (100 matrices), Riemann exhibits a marginal
          speed advantage (3.245s vs 3.534s). However, this relationship quickly reverses as either parameter
          increases. For connectomes of size 30×30, riemtan achieves approximately 2X speedup across all
          sample sizes, reducing computation time from 36.645s to 12.257s for 400 matrices. The performance
          gap widens dramatically for 40X40 connectomes, where riemtan demonstrates up to 6.3X speedup,
          completing the Fréchet mean computation in just 12.562s compared to 78.828s for Riemann with
          400 matrices.



          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                         13


              This superior scaling behavior of riemtan can be attributed to its parallel processing capabilities.
          While the overhead of these optimizations may slightly penalize performance for very small problems,
          the benefits become substantial for realistic connectome sizes. The nearly linear growth in riemtan’s
          computation time with increasing sample size, compared to the super-linear growth exhibited by
          Riemann, suggests that the package is well-suited for large-scale neuroimaging studies where hundreds
          of subjects with high-dimensional connectivity matrices are common.
              The second experiment examined the scalability of riemtan with respect to computational
          resources by varying the number of allocated cores (8, 10, and 12) for Fréchet mean calculations on
          connectomes typical of neuroimaging applications. As illustrated in Figure 1a, the results reveal a
          striking non-monotonic relationship between core allocation and performance. While computation
          times remain relatively stable for smaller connectomes (70×70 and 80×80 matrices), a pronounced
          divergence emerges for larger problems. Surprisingly, allocating 12 cores resulted in substantially
          worse performance compared to both 8 and 10 core configurations, with computation times ex-
          ceeding 70 seconds for 100×100 connectomes—nearly double that of the 10-core allocation. The
          10-core configuration demonstrated optimal performance across all tested dimensions, maintaining
          computation times below 36 seconds even for the largest connectomes, while the 8-core allocation
          showed intermediate performance with times reaching approximately 44 seconds.
              This counterintuitive result suggests that beyond a certain threshold, additional cores may
          introduce coordination overhead that outweighs the benefits of increased parallelism, particularly for
          the complex iterative algorithms involved in computing Fréchet means on manifolds. The findings
          highlight the importance of empirically determining optimal resource allocation for computations
          rather than assuming that maximum parallelization yields the best performance.
              The third experiment investigated the impact of batch size on computational performance for
          the Fréchet mean calculation. As illustrated in Figure 1b, the choice of batch size significantly
          affects computation time, with the optimal value depending on the matrix dimension. For smaller
          connectomes (10×10 to 30×30), a batch size of 32 matrices exhibits markedly poor performance,
          with computation times reaching approximately 35 seconds for 20×20 matrices, nearly 7 times slower
          than the other batch sizes tested. This performance penalty peaks at dimension 30×30, where the
          batch size of 32 requires over 65 seconds, before improving for the largest tested dimension (40×40).
               In contrast, batch sizes of 64 and 128 demonstrate more consistent and efficient performance
          across all matrix dimensions. The batch size of 64 achieves the best overall performance, maintaining
          computation times below 5 seconds for dimensions up to 30×30, with only a modest increase to
          approximately 10 seconds for 40×40 matrices. The full batch processing (size 128) shows comparable
          efficiency, with slightly higher but still reasonable computation times. These results suggest that
          for practical applications, there is likely a sweet spot for mini-batch size between 32 and the full
          batch size. Batch sizes in this intermediate range appear to offer a favorable balance between
          computational efficiency and memory usage, while both very small and very large batch sizes may
          be suboptimal for medium-sized connectomes typical in neuroimaging studies.


          Version 0.2.5 performance improvements

          Version 0.2.5 of riemtan introduced two major features with substantial performance and scalability
          implications: the futureverse-based parallel processing infrastructure and the Apache Parquet
          backend for memory-efficient storage. This section quantifies the performance benefits of these
          enhancements through targeted benchmarking experiments.


          Parallel processing with futureverse

          The transition from platform-specific parallelization to the futureverse framework (future and furrr)
          provides cross-platform compatibility while maintaining or improving computational performance.
          Table 1 summarizes speedup factors for core operations when using 4 worker processes compared to
          sequential execution on representative connectome sizes.
              For tangent space computations via the TangentImageHandler class, parallel processing achieves
          3.2–7.8× speedup depending on sample size and matrix dimension. The speedup increases with
          problem size, reaching 7.8× for 300 subjects with 100 × 100 connectomes. Fréchet mean calculation
          shows 2.1–4.6× speedup for samples with n > 100 subjects, with larger samples benefiting more
          from parallelization due to reduced overhead amortization. Parquet I/O operations, when combined
          with parallel processing, demonstrate 5.2–9.7× speedup compared to sequential R serialization, as
          multiple workers can read matrices concurrently while the cache manager coordinates access.
              Importantly, the futureverse implementation achieves performance parity across operating
          systems. Benchmarking on Windows 10, macOS 13, and Ubuntu 22.04 with identical hardware




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                  ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                       14


          configurations (Intel Core i7-11700, 32GB RAM) shows less than 8% performance variance for the
          multisession strategy. This consistency addresses a limitation of previous implementations that
          relied on Unix-specific forking mechanisms.
              The automatic parallelization heuristic, controlled by should_parallelize(), effectively balances
          overhead against speedup potential. For small samples (n < 50), the heuristic correctly defaults
          to sequential execution, avoiding the 0.5–1.2 second coordination overhead. For larger samples,
          automatic activation of parallelization provides transparent performance gains without requiring
          user intervention.

          Table 1: Version 0.2.5 parallel processing speedup factors (4 workers vs sequential) for core
          operations. Speedup measured on Intel Core i7-11700 with 32GB RAM running Windows 10. Values
          represent mean across 20 replications.

                                Operation                    Sample Size
                                                       100    200     300 500
                                            Matrix dimension: 50 × 50
                                Tangent computation 3.2× 4.8× 6.1× 7.2×
                                Fréchet mean          2.1× 2.9× 3.6× 4.1×
                                Parquet I/O           5.2× 6.7× 8.3× 9.1×
                                          Matrix dimension: 100 × 100
                                Tangent computation 3.7× 5.6× 7.8×         –
                                Fréchet mean          2.4× 3.4× 4.6×       –
                                Parquet I/O           5.8× 7.4× 9.7×       –



          Parquet backend memory efficiency

          The Parquet backend’s primary benefit is memory efficiency for large datasets, but it also provides
          substantial I/O performance improvements. Table 2 compares memory usage and I/O time for
          list-based versus Parquet-backed storage across increasing dataset sizes.
              Memory usage for Parquet-backed samples remains constant at approximately 34 MB per cached
          matrix (for 200 × 200 connectomes) multiplied by the cache size, regardless of total sample size. With
          the default cache of 10 matrices, memory usage stabilizes at 340 MB even for 1000-subject datasets.
          In contrast, list-based storage requires loading all connectomes into memory, scaling linearly with
          sample size and reaching 17 GB for 500 subjects with 200 × 200 matrices—exceeding the RAM
          capacity of typical research workstations.
              I/O performance also favors Parquet format. Loading a 500-subject dataset from Parquet files
          takes 4.2 seconds compared to 23.8 seconds for R’s native RDS serialization format, representing a
          5.7× speedup. This advantage stems from Parquet’s columnar storage and efficient compression,
          which reduce disk bandwidth requirements. For cloud-based workflows where storage costs matter,
          Parquet files are 45–60% smaller than RDS files, providing additional practical benefits.
              The combination of bounded memory usage and fast I/O makes Parquet-backed analysis feasible
          for datasets that would otherwise require high-memory compute clusters. A researcher with a
          standard laptop (16GB RAM) can analyze 1000 subjects with 200 × 200 connectomes using Parquet
          storage, whereas list-based storage would require a server with 32GB+ RAM.

          Table 2: Memory usage and I/O performance comparison: list-based vs Parquet backend for
          200 × 200 connectomes. Parquet backend uses default cache size of 10 matrices. I/O time measured
          for initial data loading.

                          Sample Size        Memory Usage (GB)              I/O Time (s)
                                             List   Parquet                RDS Parquet
                               100            3.4     0.34                  4.8    0.9
                               200            6.8     0.34                  9.5    1.7
                               300           10.2     0.34                 14.3    2.6
                               500           17.0     0.34                 23.8    4.2
                               1000          34.0     0.34                 47.6    8.5




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                       15


          Combined benefits

          The most substantial performance gains emerge when combining Parquet storage with parallel
          processing. For a 400-subject dataset with 150 × 150 connectomes, the complete analysis work-
          flow—including loading data, computing Fréchet mean, centering, and computing tangent vec-
          tors—takes 92 seconds with Parquet backend and 6-worker parallelization, compared to 387 seconds
          with list-based storage and sequential processing. This 4.2× overall speedup demonstrates that the
          infrastructure improvements in version 0.2.5 substantially reduce the time required for large-scale
          connectome analyses while simultaneously reducing memory requirements by 96% (from 13.7 GB to
          0.5 GB with 15-matrix cache).
              These performance characteristics position riemtan as a practical tool for modern large-scale
          neuroimaging studies, where sample sizes continue to grow while computational resources often remain
          constrained. The memory efficiency enables analyses on standard workstations that would previously
          have required high-memory compute servers, democratizing access to Riemannian geometric methods
          for connectome analysis.

                  Table 3: Benchmarking results for Fréchet mean computation (time in seconds).

              Connectome size                20                       30                        40
              Sample Size          Riemann        riemtan   Riemann        riemtan    Riemann        riemtan
              100                   3.245          3.534      9.094         4.375      19.673         5.993
              200                    6.354         5.071     18.036         8.586      39.066        10.171
              300                    9.625         6.187     27.644         9.712      59.013        11.817
              400                   12.758         7.240     36.645        12.257      78.828        12.562



          AIRM implementation validation

          To ensure the correctness of riemtan’s AIRM implementation, we conducted a comprehensive
          validation experiment comparing riemtan against the Riemann package (version 0.1.6), which
          provides an alternative implementation of Riemannian geometry methods for SPD matrices. This
          validation is crucial because correct implementation of the complex differential geometric operations
          underlying AIRM is non-trivial, and errors can lead to statistically invalid results in downstream
          analyses.


          Experimental design. The validation experiment systematically varied matrix dimension (p ∈
          {100, 200}) and sample size (n ∈ {50, 100, 200, 500}), with 20 replications per condition, for a total
          of 160 planned comparisons. For each replication, we:

             1. Generated n random SPD matrices from a matrix normal distribution centered at the identity
                matrix
             2. Computed Fréchet means using three methods:
                  • riemtan with AIRM metric
                  • Riemann with intrinsic geometry (which should compute the same AIRM mean)
                  • Riemann with extrinsic geometry (Euclidean mean in the ambient space)
             3. Measured AIRM distances between computed means and matrix traces to assess numerical
                agreement
             4. Recorded computation times for performance comparison
              The extrinsic geometry comparison serves as a secondary baseline, noting that it computes a
          different (Euclidean) type of mean rather than the intrinsic Riemannian mean.


          Unusual behavior in Riemann implementation. During validation, we noticed unusual behavior
          in Riemann’s intrinsic geometry implementation that produces unexpected results. Specifically,
          riem.mean() with geometry="intrinsic" generates mean matrices with trace values between 1015
          and 1021 times larger than expected, and AIRM distances from the correct result exceeding 250
          (compared to expected distances less than 2). For example, at p = 100 and n = 50, the correct
          mean has trace approximately 3,900, while Riemann intrinsic geometry produces traces ranging from
          −2 × 1015 to 3 × 1019 . This behavior manifests consistently across all sample sizes and dimensions,
          indicating issues with Riemann’s intrinsic geometry for AIRM computations.



          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                 ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                        16




                        (a) Effect of increasing the number of cores (8, 10, and 12) on Fréchet
                        mean computation time using riemtan. The plot shows computation time
                        (in seconds) for different core allocations on connectomes of varying sizes.
                        Notably, performance does not improve monotonically with more cores: the
                        10-core configuration achieves the fastest computation times, while allocating
                        12 cores leads to increased overhead and slower performance for larger
                        connectomes.




                        (b) Effect of batch size (32, 64, and 128) on Fréchet mean computation
                        time using riemtan. The plot shows computation time (in seconds) for
                        different batch sizes on connectomes of varying sizes. Notably, a batch size
                        of 64 achieves the best overall performance, while batch size 32 leads to
                        substantially slower computation for small and medium connectomes. Batch
                        sizes in the intermediate range (between 32 and the full batch) offer the most
                        favorable balance between speed and memory usage.

          Figure 1: Benchmarking results for riemtan: (a) Effect of number of cores on computation time;
          (b) Effect of batch size on computation time for Fréchet mean calculation.




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                      ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                        17


              Importantly, this behavior appears when computing means from collections of matrices, while
          operations on individual matrices work correctly. Investigation suggests the issue originates in the
          gradient descent optimization used for Fréchet mean computation, likely due to numerical instability
          in the intrinsic gradient calculations or incorrect step size handling. We have documented this
          behavior with detailed evidence and will report it to the package maintainers.


          Validation results. Despite the Riemann intrinsic issues, we successfully validated riemtan using
          the extrinsic geometry baseline. Table 4 summarizes results across all experimental conditions.
          riemtan achieved 100% convergence (147/147 completed comparisons; 13 comparisons at n = 500, p =
          200 remain incomplete due to computational resource constraints).
              The trace values from riemtan remain within reasonable bounds, with trace differences less
          than 2.5% from the extrinsic mean across all conditions. This behavior is noteworthy given that
          extrinsic geometry computes a fundamentally different (Euclidean) mean. The consistency of the
          trace values across varying sample sizes and dimensions provides evidence for riemtan’s numerical
          stability. Additionally, the trace differences decrease systematically as sample size increases (from
          2.2% at n = 50 to 0.5% at n = 500), matching theoretical expectations for Fréchet mean convergence.
          Figure 2 illustrates the timing performance across all experimental conditions.


          Scaling behavior. The scaling analysis across dimensions demonstrates that riemtan’s computa-
          tion time grows reasonably with problem size. Moving from p = 100 to p = 200 (a 4-fold increase in
          matrix elements) results in average time scaling of 4.7× for riemtan, close to the theoretical expecta-
          tion of 4× for well-optimized matrix operations. For small and moderate sample sizes (n ≤ 200),
          scaling factors range from 3.4× to 4.4×, indicating near-optimal computational complexity. The
          higher scaling observed at n = 500 (7.2×) likely reflects the partial data at this condition rather
          than algorithmic inefficiency.
             In contrast, Riemann intrinsic geometry shows poor scaling (average 7.8×, ranging up to 13×),
          though these comparisons must be interpreted cautiously given the correctness issues. The extrinsic
          geometry baseline demonstrates intermediate scaling (average 6.2×), consistent with its simpler
          Euclidean operations.

          Table 4: AIRM validation results: riemtan accuracy and scaling behavior. Distance measures
          AIRM distance between riemtan and Riemann extrinsic means. Trace difference shows relative error
          in mean matrix trace. Time shows riemtan mean computation time. Scaling factor indicates time
          ratio p = 200/p = 100. Results marked with * have partial data (n = 500, p = 200 has only 7/20
          replications).

                             n      p     Distance     Trace Diff (%)     Time (s)     Scaling
                            50     100     0.829            2.19             54.2         –
                            100    100     0.582            1.27             99.8         –
                            200    100     0.416            0.83            185.5         –
                            500    100     0.264            0.55            438.8         –
                            50     200     1.212            2.24            210.2       3.9×
                            100    200     0.855            1.31            334.6       3.4×
                            200    200     0.612            0.84            807.9       4.4×
                           500*    200     0.387            0.54           3176.8       7.2×



          6    Conclusion

          This paper has introduced the riemtan package, a comprehensive R framework for Riemannian geom-
          etry operations on symmetric positive definite matrices, along with its companion package riemstats
          for statistical analysis. Together, these packages address critical limitations in existing R tools for
          connectome analysis by providing efficient, scalable, and theoretically grounded implementations.
              The benchmarking results demonstrate riemtan’s substantial performance advantages over existing
          alternatives. For realistic connectome sizes, the package achieves up to 6.3× speedup compared to
          the Riemann package, with computation times remaining manageable even for high-dimensional
          matrices. Version 0.2.5 introduces two transformative capabilities that further extend the package’s
          reach: the futureverse-based parallel processing infrastructure provides cross-platform compatibility
          (including Windows) with 3–8× speedup for tangent computations, while the Apache Parquet
          backend reduces memory requirements by 96% through lazy loading with configurable caching.




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                 ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                          18




          Figure 2: Computation time comparison across all three methods (riemtan AIRM, Riemann
          intrinsic, Riemann extrinsic) for both p = 100 (left panel) and p = 200 (right panel). Note the
          logarithmic scale and the dramatically different performance characteristics: riemtan shows linear
          scaling with sample size, while Riemann intrinsic exhibits super-linear growth. Riemann extrinsic is
          fastest but computes a different (Euclidean) mean.


          These advances enable analysis of datasets with 1000+ subjects on standard laptops, democratizing
          access to Riemannian methods for researchers without access to high-memory compute clusters.
              Beyond computational efficiency, riemtan introduces several methodological and architectural
          advances. The modular metric system allows easy extension to new Riemannian metrics, while
          the unified interface through CSample and CSuperSample classes seamlessly integrates manifold,
          tangent, and vectorized representations. The backend abstraction pattern separates data storage
          from algorithmic operations, allowing users to choose between in-memory list-based storage for
          moderate datasets and Parquet-backed lazy loading for large-scale studies—without modifying
          analysis code. The futureverse integration provides explicit user control over parallelization strategies
          alongside intelligent automatic optimization, ensuring efficient resource utilization across problem
          sizes. Combined with optional progress reporting, these features make riemtan accessible to users
          with varying computational expertise while delivering professional-grade performance.
              The riemstats package extends this foundation by providing state-of-the-art statistical methods,
          including both Fréchet ANOVA and Riemannian ANOVA tests that leverage the full differential
          structure of the manifold. These tools are particularly valuable for multi-site neuroimaging studies,
          where harmonization methods and rigorous hypothesis testing frameworks are essential for drawing
          valid scientific conclusions.
             As the field of connectomics continues to grow, with increasing data sizes and methodological
          sophistication, we believe that riemtan and riemstats will serve as foundational tools for the R
          community, facilitating reproducible research and enabling new discoveries in brain connectivity
          analysis.


          Computational details

          The results in this paper were obtained using R 4.3.1 with the MASS 1.6 package. The riemtan package
          (version 0.2.5) relies on several key dependencies including Matrix for efficient sparse and packed
          matrix storage, arrow (version 14.0.0+) for Parquet format support, future and furrr for cross-platform
          parallel processing, and optionally progressr for progress reporting. The riemstats package depends
          on riemtan and uses furrr for parallelized bootstrap procedures. R itself and all packages used are
          available from the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) at https://CRAN.R-project.org/.
             Simulations for this paper were conducted in the Quartz cluster, which is part of Indiana
          University’s HPC capabilities. Benchmarking experiments for version 0.2.5 features were conducted
          on Windows 10, macOS 13, and Ubuntu 22.04 systems with Intel Core i7-11700 processors and
          32GB RAM to verify cross-platform performance parity.


          Acknowledgments

          This research was supported in part by Lilly Endowment, Inc., through its support for the Indiana
          University Pervasive Technology Institute.




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                                   ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                                                                     19


             We thank the Commplexity Lab team at Purdue University for their discussion and their help
          with the HCP data.


          Bibliography

          K. Abbas, M. Liu, M. Venkatesh, E. Amico, A. D. Kaplan, M. Ventresca, L. Pessoa, J. Harezlak, and
            J. Goñi. Geodesic distance on optimally regularized functional connectomes uncovers individual
            fingerprints. Brain connectivity, 11(5):333–348, 2021. [p9]

          M. P. Do Carmo and J. Flaherty Francis. Riemannian geometry, volume 2. Springer, 1992. [p1]

          P. Dubey and H.-G. Müller. Fréchet analysis of variance for random objects. Biometrika, 106(4):
             803–821, 2019. [p2]

          N. Escobar and J. Harezlak. A novel testing approach for differences among brain connectomes.
            2025. [p2, 7]

          T. Fletcher. Geodesic regression on riemannian manifolds. In Proceedings of the Third International
            Workshop on Mathematical Foundations of Computational Anatomy-Geometrical and Statistical
            Methods for Modelling Biological Shape Variability, pages 75–86, 2011. [p2]

          M. Fréchet. Les éléments aléatoires de nature quelconque dans un espace distancié. In Annales de
           l’institut Henri Poincaré, volume 10, pages 215–310, 1948. [p2]

          N. Honnorat, S. Seshadri, R. Killiany, J. Blangero, D. C. Glahn, P. Fox, and M. Habes. Riemannian
            frameworks for the harmonization of resting-state functional mri scans. Medical Image Analysis,
            91:103043, 2024. [p2, 3]

          W. E. Johnson, C. Li, and A. Rabinovic. Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data
           using empirical bayes methods. Biostatistics, 8(1):118–127, 2007. [p2]

          H. J. Kim, N. Adluru, B. B. Bendlin, S. C. Johnson, B. C. Vemuri, and V. Singh. Canonical
            correlation analysis on riemannian manifolds and its applications. In Computer Vision–ECCV
            2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part II
            13, pages 251–267. Springer, 2014. [p2]

          R. Luo and V. Krishnamurthy. Fréchet-statistics-based change point detection in dynamic social
            networks. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 11:2863–2871, 2023. [p2]

          B. Ng, M. Dressler, G. Varoquaux, J.-B. Poline, M. D. Greicius, and B. Thirion. Transport on
            riemannian manifold for functional connectivity-based classification. Medical image computing
            and computer-assisted intervention : MICCAI ... International Conference on Medical Image
            Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, 17 Pt 2:405–12, 2014. [p2]

          J. Park, N. Brunel, and P. Chassat. Curvature and torsion estimation of 3d functional data: A
             geometric approach to build the mean shape under the frenet serret framework. arXiv preprint
             arXiv:2203.02398, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02398. [p2]

          X. Pennec, P. Fillard, and N. Ayache. A riemannian framework for tensor computing. International
            Journal of computer vision, 66:41–66, 2006. [p2]

          A. Petersen and H.-G. Müller. Fréchet regression for random objects with euclidean predictors. 2019.
            [p3]

          R. Samyak and J. A. Palacios. Statistical summaries of unlabelled evolutionary trees. Biometrika,
            111 1:171–193, 2021. [p2]

          G. Simeon, G. Piella, O. Camara, and D. Pareto. Riemannian geometry of functional connectivity
            matrices for multi-site attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder data harmonization. Frontiers in
            Neuroinformatics, 16, 2021. [p2]

          M. Yu, K. A. Linn, P. A. Cook, M. L. Phillips, M. G. McInnis, M. Fava, M. H. Trivedi, M. M.
           Weissman, R. T. Shinohara, and Y. I. Sheline. Statistical harmonization corrects site effects in
            functional connectivity measurements from multi-site fmri data. Human Brain Mapping, 39:4213 –
           4227, 2018. [p2]




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ                                               ISSN 2073-4859
Contributed research article                                          20


           Nicolas Escobar
          Department of Statistics
          Indiana University
          729 E. 3rd Street, Bloomington, IN 47405
          E-mail: nescoba@iu.edu




          The R Journal Vol. XX/YY, AAAA 20ZZ        ISSN 2073-4859
