                                               Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for
                                               (Exo-)Planetary Science

                                               Jeanne Davoult [0000−0002−6177−2085] , Valentin T. Bickel [0000−0002−7914−2516] ,
                                               Caroline Haslebacher [0000−0003−0674−1216] , Yann Alibert [0000−0002−4644−8818] ,
                                               Daniel Angerhausen [0000−0001−6138−8633] , Carles Cantero [0000−0003−2073−782𝑋] , Jo
                                               Ann Egger [0000−0003−1628−4231] , Romain Eltschinger [0009−0001−7351−3232] , Yannick
arXiv:2604.09152v1 [astro-ph.EP] 10 Apr 2026




                                               Eyholzer [0009−0004−3041−2249] , Emily O. Garvin [0000−0003−2530−9330] , Salome
                                               Gruchola [0000−0002−9757−1402] , Adrien Leleu [0000−0003−2051−7974] , Sara
                                               Marques [0009−0007−3825−7791] , and Yinan Zhao [0000−0002−5009−4645]


                                               Jeanne Davoult
                                               Institut of Space Research, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Rutherfordstrasse 2, 12489 Berlin,
                                               Germany,
                                               Division of Space Research and Planetary Sciences, Physics Institute, University of Bern, Sidler-
                                               strasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland, e-mail: jeanne.davoult@dlr.de
                                               Valentin T. Bickel
                                               Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Gesellschaftsstrasse 6, 3012 Bern, Switzer-
                                               land, e-mail: valentin.bickel@unibe.ch
                                               Caroline Haslebacher
                                               Division of Space Research and Planetary Sciences, Physics Institute, University of Bern, Sidler-
                                               strasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland,
                                               and Southwest Research Institute, 1301 Walnut St Suite 400, 80302 Boulder, CO, USA, e-mail:
                                               caroline.haslebacher@contractor.swri.org
                                               Yann Alibert
                                               Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Gesellschaftsstrasse 6, 3012 Bern, Switzer-
                                               land, e-mail: yann.alibert@unibe.ch
                                               Daniel Angerhausen
                                               ETH Zurich, Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics Wolfgang-Pauli-Str. 27, 8093 Zurich,
                                               Switzerland,
                                               Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA, USA, SETI Institute, 189 N. Bernado Ave,
                                               Mountain View, CA 94043, USA, e-mail: dangerhau@phys.ethz.ch
                                               Carles Cantero
                                               Observatoire de Genève, Chemin Pegasi 51, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland, e-mail: car-
                                               les.canteromitjans@unige.ch
                                               Jo Ann Egger
                                               Division of Space Research and Planetary Sciences, Physics Institute, University of Bern, Sidler-
                                               strasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland, e-mail: jo-ann.egger@unibe.ch
                                               Romain Eltschinger
                                               Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Gesellschaftsstrasse 6, 3012 Bern, Switzer-
                                               land,
                                               Division of Space Research and Planetary Sciences, Physics Institute, University of Bern,
                                               Gesellschaftsstrasse 6, 3012 Bern, Switzerland, e-mail: romain.eltschinger@unibe.ch
                                               Yannick Eyholzer
                                               Observatoire de Genève, Université de Genève, Chemin Pegasi, 51, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland,


                                                                                                                                               1
2                                                                                      Davoult et al.

Abstract The exploration of planetary bodies in our Solar system and beyond re-
lies on the processing and interpretation of large, spatio-temporally inconsistent,
and heterogeneous datasets. Recent advances in machine learning (ML) provide un-
precedented opportunities to address many fundamental challenges posed by these
heterogeneous and hyper-dimensional datasets. This review chapter highlights inno-
vative ML methodologies that were developed and used by NCCR PlanetS members
to address three overarching challenges in (exo)planetary science. The first challenge
is sequence modelling, which encompasses the intricate analysis of one-dimensional
data such as time series of radial velocities and light curves, among other examples.
Secondly, there is pattern recognition that involves studying correlations, leveraging
convolutional neural networks for feature extraction, mapping and cross correlation
among other examples., anomaly detection through variational autoencoders, and un-
supervised clustering of mass spectrometric data. Lastly, there are generative models
and emulation-based Bayesian analysis, which encompass the development of pre-
dictive models for planetary interior structure, employing Deep Neural Networks
to understand planet formation mechanisms. These innovative ML methodologies
herald a paradigm shift in the processing of data and numerical models that repre-
sent inherent challenges in planetary and exoplanetary science, paving the way for
revolutionary discoveries and ideas in this field.



1 Introduction

Planetary sciences have evolved over the centuries, transitioning from purely as-
tronomical observations to a multidisciplinary field including physics, chemistry,
geology, and computer science. The advent of space exploration marked a major
turning point, with missions such as Mariner [1960s-70s; 1, 2, 3] opening the path


e-mail: Yannick.Eyholzer@unige.ch
Emily O. Garvin
Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics, ETH Zürich, Wolfang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093 Zürich,
Switzerland, e-mail: egarvin@phys.ethz.ch
Salome Gruchola
Division of Space Research and Planetary Sciences, Physics Institute, University of Bern, Sidler-
strasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland, e-mail: salome.gruchola@unibe.ch
Adrien Leleu
Observatoire de Genève, Université de Genève, Chemin Pegasi, 51, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland,
e-mail: adrien.leleu@unige.ch
Sara Marques
Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Gesellschaftsstrasse 6, 3012 Bern, Switzer-
land, e-mail: sara.marques@unibe.ch
Yinan Zhao
Department of Astronomy, University of Texas at Austin, 2515 Speedway, Austin, TX 78712, USA,
e-mail: yinan.zhao@austin.utexas.edu
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science              3

to the exploration of Mars, Venus, and Mercury, followed by Voyager 1 and 2 [1977;
4, 5], which provided unprecedented insights into the outer planets. More recently,
exoplanet-focused missions like Kepler [2009; 6] and the Transiting Exoplanet Sur-
vey Satellite [TESS, 2018; 7] have largely expanded our catalog of known worlds
with thousands of new detections, while missions such as Juno [2011; 8] and the
James Webb Space Telescope [JWST, 2021; 9] have deepened our understanding
of planetary and exoplanetary environments, and formation processes. In parallel,
asteroid exploration missions like Origins Spectral Interpretation Resource Identifi-
cation Security – Regolith Explorer [OSIRIS-REx, 2016; 10] and Double Asteroid
Redirection Test [DART, 2021; 11] have provided invaluable data on small bodies.
Alongside observational breakthroughs, theoretical models have also advanced sig-
nificantly, refining our understanding of planetary formation and evolution. Models
such as the Grand Tack [12] and the Nice Model [13, 14, 15] have reshaped our com-
prehension of the Solar System’s dynamical history, while 3-D atmospheric simula-
tions using general circulation models [GCMs; 16, 17, 18] provide detailed insights
into planetary climates. Currently, exoplanetary studies rely on time-consuming
computational techniques such as Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) for
simulating giant impacts for example [e.g., 19, 20] or Magneto-Hydrodynamics
(MHD) simulations for modelling protoplanetary disks [e.g., 21].
Thus, planetary sciences now face two major challenges: the exponential growth of
data and the increasing complexity of models and datasets. Missions like the Lu-
nar and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiters [MRO, 2005; e.g., 22], Gaia [23], JWST
and in the near future Europa Clipper [2024; 24] and JUpiter ICy moons Ex-
plorer [JUICE, 2023; 25], the PLAnetary Transits and Oscillations of stars mission
[PLATO; 26, 27] or the Atmospheric Remote-sensing Infrared Exoplanet Large-
survey mission [ARIEL; 28], generate or will generate vast amounts of data, making
manual analysis increasingly unfeasible. Meanwhile, the computational cost of so-
phisticated physical models continues to rise, limiting their efficiency.
Machine Learning (ML) and, more specifically, Deep Learning (DL) provide pow-
erful solutions to these challenges. ML enables computers to learn from data and
make decisions, in a similar way to how humans think. Unlike regular astrophysics
programming that follows set physical rules, ML finds patterns, makes predictions,
and gets better by processing data. It works in two main ways: classification and
regression. Classification groups data into distinct classes, corresponding to dis-
crete values, while regression seeks to approximate a function linking continuous
variables, in order to highlight the underlying mechanism. By automating data anal-
ysis, accelerating simulations, and detecting patterns that traditional methods might
overlook, the integration of AI-driven methodologies into planetary sciences offer
new opportunities to interpret complex datasets and improve predictive modeling. In
this chapter, we define machine learning (ML) as models that do not rely on neural
network architectures, for example ensemble methods such as random forests or
boosting, clustering algorithms, or support vector machines (SVM). These models
are usually less complex and often depend on manual data preparation. Deep learn-
ing (DL), by contrast, refers to models based on neural networks, which are typically
more complex and can automatically extract structure from data. It is important to
4                                                                          Davoult et al.

specify that these definitions are used to name these two concepts in this chapter, but
that in general DL is a sub-ensemble of ML. Finally, ML and DL are distinguished
between ”supervised2 methods, where models train on labelled data in order to solve
classification or regression tasks, and ”unsupervised” methods, where models learn
to identify structures or groupings in unlabelled data, as in the case of clustering or
dimension reduction.
The use of machine learning in space science began in the 1990s but grew signifi-
cantly in the 2000s with increased computing power and large astronomical surveys.
One of the first key applications was the use of neural networks to classify galax-
ies from Sloan Digital Sky Survey [SDSS, 2000 29] images [30, 31]. In planetary
sciences, the first machine learning models were adopted in early 2000s to map the
martian surface [32, 33, 34, 35] through support vector machines (SVMs), super-
vised and unsupervised methods and to automate Mars rovers in the recognition of
minerals in spectra [36, 37, 38] with neural networks (NNs). Since then, models
such as random forests, SVMs, and especially deep neural networks (DNNs) have
transformed planetary science data analysis. Today, these methods are more and
more used for exoplanet detection and characterization, studying planetary surfaces,
or modeling planetary atmospheres. In particular, deep learning, with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and variational autoencoders (VAEs), has become essential
for processing the vast amounts of data from space missions.
The NCCR PlanetS has played a significant role in encouraging the adoption of
ML and DL in planetary sciences. By leveraging interdisciplinary expertise, PlanetS
has facilitated major advances in exoplanet detection and characterization, planetary
system dynamics, atmospheric modeling, and the study of small bodies such as as-
teroids and comets. Since its start in 2014—coinciding more or less with the rise
of ML in astronomy—PlanetS has contributed to the democratization of ML and
DL techniques, promoting their application in astrophysical data analysis, planetary
structure modeling, and beyond.
This chapter provides a review of the main contributions of PlanetS members and
associates in the application of ML and DL in planetary sciences, illustrating how
these techniques are revolutionizing the field and shaping the future of planetary
research. In Section 2, we explore research on sequence modeling, followed by an
examination of pattern recognition in Section 3. Section 4 introduces two studies
that facilitate the emulation of internal structural models. Finally, we discuss the new
challenges and limitations that the use of ML and DL in planetary science brings
and conclude in Section 5.



2 Sequence modelling

In planetary science, sequence modeling is used to analyze and predict temporal,
spatial, spectral or event-based sequences. Temporal sequence analysis includes
studying radial velocity and stellar light curves to detect and characterize exoplanets,
model observational noise, and track planetary atmospheric changes due to sea-
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science                 5

sonal and weather variations. Spatial sequence analysis examines temperature and
pressure profiles in atmospheres and the internal structure of planets, exoplanets,
and moons. Spectral sequence analysis involves exoplanetary atmospheric absorp-
tion spectroscopy and the mineralogical composition of planetary surfaces. Event
sequence analysis includes volcanic eruptions on Io per instance, or the frequency
of asteroid impacts on the Moon. In addition, sequence modelling can be used to
emulate results of theoretical models (surrogate models), as long as their predictions
can be represented as sequences of any kind. An example developed in the NCCR
PlanetS is presented at the end of this section.
Members of NCCR PlanetS have contributed to incorporate ML techniques in se-
quence modeling studies in various ways, as described in the following sections:
noise modeling in stellar radial velocity time series (Sect. 2.1), transit timing varia-
tion (TTV) detection (Sect. 2.2), development of surrogate model for global models
of planetary system formation (Sect. 2.3) and detection of exoplanets in high-contrast
imaging using angular differential imaging (Sect. 2.4).



2.1 Improving Earth-like planet detection in radial velocity using deep
    learning

The detection of low-mass planets using the radial velocity (RV) technique remains
extremely challenging in the presence of stellar activity. Many novel methods have
been proposed to mitigate stellar activity for exoplanet detection as the presence of
stellar activity in RV measurements is the current major limitation. Both the template
matching algorithm and the cross-correlation function (CCF) algorithm extract the
average RV information contained in a spectrum. Key variations at the spectral
level related to stellar activity may be lost when performing the dimensionality
reduction imposed by the RV extraction algorithms. In [39], the authors present a
novel convolutional neural network (CNN)-based algorithm that efficiently models
stellar activity signals at the spectral level, enhancing the detection of Earth-like
planets.
A CNN is trained to build the correlation between the spectral line profile change
and the corresponding RV, full width at half maximum (FWHM) and bisector span
(BIS) values derived from the classical cross-correlation function. The RV signals
only due to the doppler effect can be obtained by subtracting the RV time series
predicted from the trained NN (due to stellar activity) from the raw RV time series.
The residuals is mainly due to the presence of planets.
In the context of this work, the main challenge lies in the amount of data that can
be used to train CNNs for different types of stars. The number of spectra available
for most of RV observations of different stars is less than 1000. Hence the limitation
of the available data for different stars is therefore the main obstacle. In order to
efficiently train the NN, the authors use cross-validation as a resampling method. In
detail, the spectral shells are randomly divided into 10 groups. For each iteration,
one group is designated as the test set, while the remaining groups are used to train
6                                                                                      Davoult et al.

a model. The final results is the summary of the evaluations conducted on the test
sets across all iterations.
In [39], the authors aim to build a NN that can predict the RV induced by stellar
activity from spectral shape shells in the 𝑑𝑑𝑣𝑓0 , 𝑓0 space. Once the NN is well trained
and insensitive to planetary signals, then simply removing the predicted RVs from
the raw RVs should enhance the significance of planet signals embedded into stellar
signals. This algorithm has been tested on three intensively observed stars: Alpha
Centauri B (HD 128621), Tau ceti (HD 10700), and the Sun. By injecting simulated
planetary signals at the spectral level, the authors of [39] demonstrate that their
machine learning algorithm can achieve, for HD 128621 and HD 10700, a detection
threshold of 0.5 m/s in semi-amplitude for planets with periods ranging from 10
to 300 days. This threshold would correspond to the detection of a ∼ 4 𝑀⊕ in the
habitable zone of those stars. As an example, the framework used 380 spectra for
HD 10700. On the HARPS-N solar dataset, thanks to significantly more data, their
algorithm is even more efficient at mitigating stellar activity signals and can reach
a threshold of 0.2 m/s, which would correspond to a 2.2 𝑀⊕ planet on the orbit of
the Earth as shown in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that
such low detection thresholds are reported for the Sun, but also for other stars, and
therefore this highlights the efficiency of this CNN-based algorithm at mitigating
stellar activity in RV measurements.




Fig. 1 Exoplanet detection limits from the neural network framework in the case of HARPS-N
solar spectra. Left: Detection limit map in the period-amplitude domain. The red dots indicate
the successful detection by the trained NN with a false alarm probability (FAP) > 0.1%. Middle:
Amplitude comparison between the injected and recovered signals in the period-amplitude domain.
The amplitude difference for most of the recovered signals are < 20%. The large difference at
low amplitude (0.1 m/s) is likely due to noise in the data. Right: Phase comparison between the
injected and recovered signals in the period-amplitude domain. The phase difference for most of the
recovered planets is < 0.04. The large differences at long periods is likely due to a poorer sampling
of the phase for long-period planetary signals. Figure adapted from [39].
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science                    7

2.2 Alleviating the transit timing variation bias in transit surveys

The transit method has proven to be the most successful method for the discovery
of exoplanets so far. By continuously monitoring the stellar flux over an extended
duration, it is possible to detect periodic dips in the star brightness, indicative of
a planet transiting across the star along the observer’s line of sight. These dips of
flux allow the measurement of the relative size of the planet to the host star. When
a single planet orbits a single star, its orbit is periodic, which implies that the transit
happens at a fixed time interval.
However, in multi-planetary systems the assumption of strictly Keplerian orbits
no longer holds, as mutual gravitational interactions between the planets induce
perturbations [40]. The magnitude of these perturbations depends on the system’s
configuration, and is significantly amplified for (near)-resonant systems as the per-
turbative effects accumulate over time [41, 42, 43]. This often leads to quasi-periodic
orbits, deviating from the Keplerian periodicity. Observationally, these deviations
manifest as transit timing variations (TTVs). Standard algorithms rely on the pe-
riodicity of the signal and typically fail in this situation and suffer strong biases.
This is unfortunate as TTVs offer a wealth of information; they encode gravitational
interractions, allowing the retrieve the masses of the planets [see e.g.; 44],and they
allow to infer the presence of a non-transiting planet [45, 46]. More importantly,
systems in resonance often kept a pristine configuration after their formation, thus
detecting them offer a way to explore system formation histories.
In this context, RIVERS.deep [47] is an approach within the broader RIVERS frame-
work (Eyholzer et al. in prep) that aims to tackle the challenge of TTVs. Specifically,
RIVERS.deep is designed to identify planetary transit signals in 2D representation
of light curves, known as river diagrams or river plots [48], using computer vision
through machine learning.
The RIVERS.deep model is a fully convolutional neural network based on the
”Tiramisu” architecture [49], a denser and more complex variant of the classical
”U-net” [50]. The model is trained to recognize the vertical tracks within river di-
agrams and produces a mask highlighting the transit signal from the background
noise. This enables the identification of individual transit times without assuming
strict periodicity.
RIVERS.deep has enabled the detection of exoplanets missed by traditional meth-
ods, such as Kepler-1705 b and c [47], and Kepler-1972 b and c [51]—both resonant
pairs affected by TTVs. It also improved the characterization of known systems, like
Kepler-404, revealing resonant dynamics and clarifying a false positive as part of
a TTV-affected signal (Eyholzer et al. in prep).Additionally, RIVERS.deep refined
mass estimates for 34 sub-Neptunes [52], showing that resonant planets tend to be
less dense, highlighting the importance of accurate TTV modeling [53].
8                                                                          Davoult et al.

2.3 Surrogate models: using transformers to predict planetary systems
    architectures

Sophisticated planetary system formation models have been developed in the NCCR
PlanetS (see chapter Kessler et al. on the Bern model) in order to compute, in
an end-to-end approach, the result of planet formation. Such a model essentially
solves differential equations to predict, from the properties of a protoplanetary disk,
populations of planetary systems in which all planetary properties (e.g. mass, orbital
elements, composition, etc...) are computed in a self-consistent way. These results
can then be used to interpret observations [e.g. by predicting which planets are
likely to exist in a system where only a few planets have been discovered, 54,
55], and to constrain physical processes at work during planet formation [e.g. by
comparing model results with observations, 56]. As multi-planetary systems contain,
by definition, more than one planet, one key ingredient in the Bern model is the
inclusion of a N-body code to compute the interactions between planets forming in
the same system [57]. Combined with the fact that planets in a given system can
have vastly different orbital period (which constrains the integration timescale to
be small), the computation of a population of planetary systems requires massive
computer resources. As an example, the NGPPS main population [considering only
1000 systems with 100 forming planets each, 58] took one million CPU hours to
compute.
On the other hand, a planetary system can be considered either as a set of objects,
or as a sequence of objects (provided an ordering scheme—e.g. based on the orbital
period of planets—is fixed).Such a sequence prediction model can, in turn, be used
to emulate the results of the Bern model, thus accelerating largely the computation
of planetary system architectures.
In a recent paper, Alibert, Davoult and Marques (2025, in review) have used this
approach to train a transformer-based model that can be used to emulate some
results of the Bern model. In this paper, the authors only considered the formation
of planetary systems orbiting solar-type stars, and trained their model on a set of
∼25000 planetary systems computed with the Bern model, with 20 forming planets
per system. In this paper, planets were characterized only by two features: their
mass and semi-major axis.The model is based on the transformer architecture [59]
that has become extremely popular thanks to the development of large language
models (LLMs). In short, a transformer uses the so-called attention mechanism
in order to model the probability distribution of the n-th element of a sequence,
knowing the previous elements in the same sequence. Using terms appropriate for
planetary systems, this means computing the probability distribution of the mass and
semi-major axis a planet 𝑛 in a sequence (the planets being ordered by increasing
semi-major axis), knowing the mass and semi-major axis of all planets 0 to 𝑛 − 1 in
the same system. Such a model, once trained, can be used to produce large number of
sequences. All new sequences are always produced in an inside-out process, starting
with the innermost planet and extending until the outer parts of the system. These
sequence can then be used, for example, to predict what are the other planets that
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science                  9

could reside, according to the Bern model, in the same system as some already
discovered planets.



2.4 Machine learning for exoplanet detection in high-contrast imaging
    with angular differential imaging strategy

The direct imaging of exoplanets using 10-meter-class ground-based telescopes has
become a reality in modern astrophysics due to advancements in high-contrast imag-
ing (HCI). Techniques such as extreme adaptive optics (AO) are used to correct
atmospheric distortions, and state-of-the-art HCI instruments attached to the tele-
scope employ coronagraphs [60] to block starlight and manage the high brightness
contrast between stars and their exoplanets.
Despite these advanced technologies, exoplanet detection in high-contrast images
remains challenging due to various noise sources. These include photon noise from
residual stellar light and thermal background emission, as well as speckle noise
arising from atmospheric turbulence and optical aberrations. Quasi-static speckles,
which appear as scattered starlight artifacts, can closely resemble exoplanet signals
in both shape and brightness, making it difficult to reliably distinguish true planetary
signals from noise.
To overcome this, observing strategies like angular differential imaging [ADI; 61]
combined with powerful image post-processing algorithms are employed. ADI in-
volves capturing a sequence of images in pupil-stabilized mode, where the telescope’s
pupil remains fixed while the image field rotates due to Earth’s motion. As a result,
astrophysical signals rotate relative to quasi-static speckles, enabling to differentiate
true exoplanets.
   In [62], the authors present NA-SODINN, a supervised deep learning classifier
based on convolutional neural networks, specifically designed for robust exoplanet
detection in ADI-PCA (PCA stands for principal component analysis) processed
frames. Extensive evaluation, including performance assessments across diverse
datasets from multiple instruments and participation in the Exoplanet Imaging Data
Challenge [EIDC 63], demonstrated that NA-SODINN consistently outperforms the
most advanced detection algorithms. In Cantero et al. (in prep,a), the authors apply
the NA-SODINN detector to reprocess the F150 sample from the SPHERE Infrared
survey for Exoplanets [SHINE; 64]. This sample comprises 150 targets observed
with VLT/SPHERE using H2/H3 narrowband filters and angular differential imag-
ing. By leveraging the enhanced detection capabilities of NA-SODINN, they aim
to identify new planetary candidates within this dataset, advancing the search for
exoplanets. The NA-SODINN detector improves detection limits in post-processed
HCI data, allowing for the identification of a larger number of planetary candidates.
This contribution is particularly important for filling the observational gap between
RV and HCI surveys, providing crucial data for understanding exoplanet populations
across a broader range of orbital separations.
In another paper, Cantero et al. (in prep, b), the authors present a novel speckle
10                                                                         Davoult et al.

subtraction algorithm. Over the past decade, PCA has become the industry standard
for speckle subtraction in HCI and is now widely integrated into most HCI software
packages, including VIP [65]. Its widespread adoption is largely due to its simplicity
and computational efficiency. However, PCA has two notable limitations: the loss of
the planet signal [66] and the inability to account for non-linear correlations.
Cantero et al. (in prep., b) present an algorithm that addresses these challenges
while achieving higher contrast levels. To this end, the authors are designing a
deep learning-based denoiser model that learns the speckle noise distribution and
significantly enhances subtraction performance. This approach combines several
state-of-the-art deep learning technologies, including variational autoencoders and
latent diffusion models, and leverages conditional learning for optimal results. The
proposed model will be optimized for SPHERE and SPHERE+ data, as the next gen-
eration of instruments promises to significantly extend the reach of HCI observations.




3 Pattern recognition

Pattern recognition has been one of the earliest applications of ML in planetary sci-
ence, in early 2000s. Pattern recognition is the process of identifying and classifying
regularities or structures in data, such as shapes, sequences, or trends. It involves
training models to automatically detect these patterns and make predictions or deci-
sions based on new, unseen data. It was first used for surface mapping, particularly
on Mars, where ML techniques helped automate the classification of terrains or the
recognition of craters using orbital imagery from missions like Mars Global Sur-
veyor or Mars Express [32, 33, 34, 35], or helped the identification of minerals in
spectra [36, 37, 38]. Since then, pattern recognition has been widely applied across
different domains. Techniques such as neural networks, SVMs, clustering algorithms
or ensemble learning methods have enabled the analyze of large datasets efficiently,
uncovering patterns that would be difficult to identify manually.
PlanetS members have contributed to the use of ML techniques in pattern recog-
nition with different topics: unveiling correlations between planets’ properties in
planetary systems (Sect. 3.1), characterizing and mapping planetary surfaces (Sect.
3.2), detection of exoplanets in high-contrast spectroscopy (Sect. 3.3), and analyses
of mass spectra (Sect. 3.4).




3.1 Unveiling correlations in planetary systems

The study of correlations between data is essential in science, as it enables trends
to be identified and complex phenomena to be better understood. In the science
of exoplanets, these analyses are crucial for gaining a better understanding of the
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science                 11

formation and evolution of planetary systems, as well as refining the search for po-
tentially habitable worlds. In recent years, several correlations have been identified
among the growing population of exoplanets discovered by the CoRoT [67], Kepler,
and more recently, TESS missions. One of the most well-established correlations is
the increase in the frequency of giant planets with stellar metallicity [e.g., 68, 69].
This relationship is explained by the greater availability of heavy elements, which
enhances accretion and facilitates the rapid formation of bodies reaching the criti-
cal mass [e.g., 70]. Another correlation links the metallicity of the host star to the
eccentricity of giant planets [e.g., 71]. Additionally, the frequency of giant planets
depends not only on stellar metallicity but also on stellar mass: it increases with
stellar mass, which is assumed to be proportional to that of the protoplanetary disk
[e.g., 72, 73] (see chapter Kessler et al., this collection). It has also been shown that
stars hosting exoplanets exhibit a C/O abundance ratio that is 0.01 to 0.05 higher
than that of stars without planets [74] and tend to be refractory-depleted [75]. Thus,
it is clear that the properties of exoplanets are closely linked to the environment
in which they form, including the host star, the protoplanetary disk, and planetary
interactions. Studies based on synthetic populations of planetary systems generated
by the Bern model [76, 77] have successfully connected the final architecture of ex-
oplanetary systems to their formation pathways (see chapter Kessler et al. in prep on
the Bern model). Furthermore, [54] identified correlations between the presence of
an undetected Earth-like planet (ELP) in a system and various parameters, including
the host star’s mass, the observable system architecture, and the mass, radius, and
orbital period of the innermost detected planet.
Building on this study, in [55] we trained a Random Forest model on three synthetic
populations of planetary systems from the Bern model to identify and classify sys-
tems most likely to host an ELP. Random Forest is an ensemble learning method
composed of multiple decision trees. Each tree (or local classifier) is trained on a
random subset of the data, and the global classifier makes decisions based on major-
ity voting among local classifiers. If most trees classify a system as ‘True’ (hosting
an ELP), the final classification is ‘True’; otherwise, it is ‘False’. The Random Forest
model used in this study consists of 500 decision trees. This approach balances vari-
ance reduction via ensemble learning while maintaining reasonable training time.
Each tree is trained on a minimum of 100 instances, increasing diversity among trees
and improving generalization. Additionally, tree depth is limited to five, meaning
the model can make at most five sequential splits from root to leaf. This constraint
reduces complexity, prevents overfitting, and ensures the model focuses on capturing
the most general and meaningful trends in the data.
This approach demonstrated strong performance in model testing, achieving a pre-
cision score of up to 0.99, indicating that 99% of positively classified instances
were true positives. This result confirms that the Random Forest model accurately
identifies systems hosting an undetected ELP within the synthetic populations of the
Bern model.
We then applied this model to 1567 observed planetary systems with at least one
known planet to identify the most likely ELP-hosting candidates. Among these, the
model classified 44 systems with a voting rate ≥ 90%, suggesting a high probabil-
12                                                                         Davoult et al.

ity of hosting an ELP. Further details and a complete list of identified systems are
available in [55].



3.2 Features extraction

3.2.1 Characterizing the spatio-temporal evolution of planetary surfaces with
      Deep Learning

Since the beginning of space exploration, the identification and morphometric char-
acterization of atmospheric and surface features on bodies across the solar system
has largely relied on human-driven, manual review of orbital image data. Faced with
exponentially increasing data downlink rates and image archives with millions of
individual images, the human-driven review of image data becomes increasingly
tedious and ineffective, effectively reducing the scientific return of current and up-
coming missions. Deep learning-driven search routines are a powerful tool to address
the limitations of manual image review, representing the only viable way of enabling
the processing and analysis of the vast data to be returned by future exploration
missions. Since 2018, a range of studies has been exploring the application of deep
learning tools to planetary surface and atmospheric mapping, underlining its signif-
icant potential.
The authors of [78, 79] demonstrated how off-the-shelf supervised CNN-driven
object detection architectures (specifically RetinaNet – TensorFlow and YOLO –
PyTorch) can be re-purposed and re-trained to identify rockfalls in orbital images
of the Moon and Mars, i.e., small geologic expressions of weathering, erosion, and
planetary surface evolution.[80] deployed these CNNs at scale, scanning the entire
lunar and martian surfaces (processing hundreds of thousands of orbital images) and
identifying more than 130 000 rockfalls, marking the first application of CNNs to
create a global-scale catalog of geologic features on the Moon and Mars (or any
planetary body). Using the spatial distribution of rockfalls, [80, 81, 82] inferred the
geologic processes driving rockfall occurrence on the Moon and Mars, most notably
meteoroid impacts, insolation, and quakes.
The same authors developed follow-up CNN detectors to create global catalogs of
other geologic expressions of surface evolution on the Moon, specifically granu-
lar flows [i.e, small landslides; 83] and fractured boulders [84, 85]. These studies
demonstrated the decisive role of host terrain age and surface composition in control-
ling the nature and magnitude of planetary surface evolution. Currently, the authors
are supporting an effort to use CNNs to catalog every single boulder on the lunar
surface [86].
On Mars, [87] and [88] developed CNN detectors to identify geomorphic, geologic,
and mineralogic expressions of past (near-)surface water on Mars, specifically pitted
cones and chloride salt deposits. These studies revealed that pitted cone formation on
Mars is most likely driven by mud rather than igneous volcanism and uncovered new
evidence of transient bodies of near-surface brines that were widespread in Mars’
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science                13

northern hemisphere, with significant implications for our understanding of Mars’
past climate. Additionally, [89, 90, 91] mapped hundreds of new impact events and
correlated their spatiotemporal occurrence with seismic data from NASA’s InSight
mission. These studies identified the largest impacts found near InSight, which were
missed by earlier year-long manual surveys, increased the number of potential seis-
mic–impact event matches by a factor of ∼8, and revealed that Mars’ present-day
impact rate is approximately twice as high as previously estimated. Further, [92]
systematically catalogued atmospheric phenomena such as dust devils in several
decades’ worth of orbital image data, offering unprecedented insights into the dy-
namics of the lowermost martian atmosphere and the sourcing and global distribution
of atmospheric dust.
On Mercury, [93] employed CNN-driven detectors to create the first consistent,
global reference catalog of Mercury’s enigmatic ‘hollow’ features.This study, along
with [94], provided several independent lines of evidence for the processes that form
and shape hollows over time: subsurface volatile exposure through micrometeoroid
bombardment and insolation-driven outgassing of subsurface volatiles.
The author of [95, 96] experimented with and demonstrated the significant potential
of multi-domain learning—leveraging data from multiple planetary bodies—to en-
able the re-utilization of existing labels and reduce the need for the tedious creation
of new batches of training and testing labels when studying similar features across
different planetary bodies. In addition, [97] demonstrated the value of unsupervised
detection methods, such as VAEs, which utilize all available data in a dataset without
requiring training labels.


3.2.2 Mapping linear surface features on planetary bodies with deep learning

The automated detection and segmentation of linear surface features on planetary
bodies can pose different challenges than previously mentioned objects (e.g. boul-
ders, pitted cones, dust devils). First, a linear feature can encompass a large bounding
box in which only few pixels belong to the linear feature (imagine it is diagonal to the
image borders). Second, if the linear feature is only a few pixels (≤ 5 px) in width,
a small inaccuracy of the model segmentation can lead to a very small intersection-
over-union (IoU; the IoU denotes the number of pixels in the intersection divided
by the number of pixels of the union of predicted mask (or box) and ground truth
mask (or box)). In the particular case of linear surface features on Jupiter’s icy
moon Europa (lineaments), an intricate network of lineaments at a regional scale
(200 m/px) poses a challenging problem to disentangle. In some geologic areas, the
ridged plains, the network of lineaments is so dense that one image displaying an
area of ca. 580 km2 can contain a large number of lineament instances (see Fig. 2).
    Hitherto, mapping of lineaments was a manual task [e.g., 100, 101, 102, 103,
104, 105]. This limits the amount of data that can be analysed and therefore limits the
global scale of the drawn conclusions of a given lineament study. Partially, the extent
is, as of today, limited by the available imagery from previous space missions (Galileo
and Voyager). However, in the next decade, approximately 500 times more imaging
14                                                                                   Davoult et al.




Fig. 2 An example of a 112x112 pixel input image of Europa’s surface at a regional scale of
215 m/px. The input image shows a dense network of linear surface features. The four colours
represent four different categories. The output of LineaMapper v1.0 [98] served as a guideline for
generating more training data to train v1.1 (Mask R-CNN) and v2.0 (SAM) [99]. The ground truth
is closest to the output of LineaMapper v1.1, although not all of the >15 features were identified.
Figure adapted from [99].



data will be available for a global lineament analysis [106, 107, 98]. Therefore,
preparation for an automated analysis can help to gain near-instantaneous insights
and potentially adapt mission planning. [98] introduces a supervised deep learning
network based on the reliable Mask R-CNN architecture [108] that demonstrates the
ability of deep learning models to tackle lineament analysis on Europa. Eventually,
the automated mapping of lineaments can inform formation mechanisms of geologic
units on a global scale, as shown in [99] for a selected semi-automatically mapped
area.
[99] also concluded that for this specific task, the performance of a fine-tuned deep
learning model is dominated by the dataset, not the architecture, agreeing with
observations made by [95, 96]. [109] applies the model of [98] without fine-tuning
to other planetary bodies (Venus, Ganymede, Enceladus) to showcase the usability
and transferability of linear surface feature detection on planetary bodies.
[110] introduces an automated extraction algorithm of a linear feature’s direction,
and length, width, number of segments (used in [99]). To conclude, future planetary
data from upcoming missions request a more efficient way of extracting information
from the data, without eliminating the human from the loop.



3.3 Machine learning for exoplanet detection in high-contrast
    spectroscopy

Spectroscopic observations of substellar companions are essential for unveiling the
structure and composition of exoplanetary atmospheres [e.g., 111, 112]. Such insights
are pivotal in understanding the formation history of exoplanets [e.g., 113, 114]. In
this regard, cross-correlation spectroscopy (CCS) has emerged as a well-established
technique for molecular detection and atmospheric characterisation.
This method involves cross-correlating a molecular template or full atmospheric
model with an observed planetary spectrum across a range of radial velocities (RVs),
with a detection indicated by a statistically significant correlation peak at the planet’s
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science                15

RV. CCS is recognised as a well established method for detecting molecular species
and isotopologues within atmospheres [e.g., 115, 116, 117]. In this case, CCS is
particularly useful when the planet’s continuum is lost during data reduction [e.g.,
115, 118, 119], for example in absence of angular differential imaging [ADI, 61].
While CCS and molecular mapping have demonstrated robust performance in iden-
tifying molecular species, the statistical significance of these detections often relies
on the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio of the cross-correlation peak. However, this metric
typically assumes Gaussian, independent, and identically distributed (i.i.d.) noise,
which is often not the case due to systematic and random effects from instrumenta-
tion, observation conditions, and stellar or molecular residuals [119]. Such violations
of noise assumptions can lead to unreliable detection confidence when using tradi-
tional S/N metrics [120]. In addition, it is not possible to automatise the S/N scoring
of a high number of spectra from multiple datasets or planets, as the application
of this S/N metric relies on prior knowledge of the expected location of the cross-
correlation peak.
Such challenges were recently discussed and addressed by [121] using ML tech-
niques in the spectral dimension and [122] in the spatio-temporal regime. They
show together that learning relevant features from cross-correlated spectral data can
enhance detection capabilities compared to the use of traditional S/N-based metrics.
In particular, [121] introduced the ML for cross-correlation spectroscopy (MLCCS)
approach, integrating ML with CCS to enhance the sensitivity to faint molecular
signals. Using one dimensional CNNs, this method analyses the full RV dimension
to detect deterministic patterns from individual molecular features, especially in
non-Gaussian and non-i.i.d. noise environments. In addition, the method was proven
to be invariant to shifts in RV and is this applicable to multiple planets and spec-
tral instances at a time. The MLCCS method offers enhanced detection sensitivity
and reliability for detection of individual molecules, and conspicuity in molecular
maps. This method is expected to be particularly useful with IFS instruments like
JWST/MIRI [123, 119], VLT/ERIS[124], and the upcoming ELT/HARMONI [e.g.,
125, 126, 127] but its one-dimensional framework is designed to be adaptable to
slit spectroscopy [e.g., with Keck/OSIRIS and CRIRES+ 128, 129, 130] as well as
individual spectra. This method’s agnosticism towards specific atmospheric models
and its robustness to complex noise conditions could lead to a paradigm shift in
how molecular detections are validated, potentially optimizing telescope time and
improving the efficiency of spectroscopic surveys [121].



3.4 Unsupervised techniques for in situ mass spectrometry

Raw scientific data are, in most cases, unlabeled, and the generation of labels often
involves labor-intensive manual work. In cases where labeled data are scarce, difficult
to obtain, or impractical to generate—such as in space research—unsupervised ML
becomes particularly useful. As unsupervised ML only requires the data themselves
as input, without pre-existing labels, it is a powerful tool for identifying hidden
16                                                                                     Davoult et al.

patterns and structures within datasets and understanding their distribution in high-
dimensional space. The most prominently used unsupervised techniques include
dimensionality reduction, density estimation, and clustering, which allow to extract
meaningful insights from raw, high-dimensional data.
Dimensionality reduction simplifies complex data sets by transforming them into
a lower dimensional space while preserving essential information. This transfor-
mation can exploit correlations or similarity between features (based on a chosen
metric). By reducing the number of features, dimensionality reduction helps visualize
high-dimensional data and reduces the computational requirements for subsequent
analyses, such as clustering. Clustering groups data points on the basis of common
characteristics, allowing the homogeneity of a data set to be examined effectively.
While clustering of high-dimensional data is possible, removing or reducing features
that carry little or no information generally improves the quality of the clustering
analysis, hence, these algorithms often benefit from being applied to dimensionally
reduced data.
Both dimensionality reduction and clustering techniques can be applied to a wide
range of data. In mass spectrometry, [131] uses dimensionality reduction and clus-
tering to separate collected mass spectra into distinct groups based on their chemical
composition. These techniques have been applied to data collected from microfos-
sils in ancient geological samples from Earth [132] using a space-prototype laser
ablation and ionization mass spectrometer (LIMS) developed at the University of
Bern [133]. Data preprocessing, including noise reduction and normalization, has
been shown to be critical to ensure effective data handling and to reduce the in-
fluence of noise on the results [131]. Such applications highlight the potential of
unsupervised ML to identify biosignatures and mineralogical features in extrater-
restrial materials. In the context of space exploration, unsupervised ML still plays a
minor role compared to supervised approaches. So far, it has mainly been applied
to space-acquired data, but in-situ applications are becoming more popular. These
include data analysis, anomaly detection, and resource optimization [134, 135, 136].
These techniques can support data prioritization, allowing spacecraft to optimize the
selection of high-value or interesting data for transmission to Earth, as visualized in
Figure 3.

 Data collection   Pre-processing    Embedding         Clustering      Histogramming
                                                                                            Mineral 1
                                                                                            Mineral 2
                                                                                            Mineral 3
     LMS




                                                                                            Mineral 4




Fig. 3 Unsupervised analysis pipeline for on-board data clustering. The collected and pre-processed
data can be dimensionality reduced and clustered to find the groups of spectra containing information
of interest, for example, signatures of certain minerals or trace elements. Reproduced and adapted
from [131].
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science               17

4 Model emulation with deep learning

In recent years, the continuous improvement of numerical models in planetary sci-
ences has led to increasingly complex and computationally expensive simulations.
These models, while more accurate, often require significant time and resources to
run. To address this challenge, deep learning techniques are being employed to learn
from the outputs of these time-consuming models and predict results without the
need to rerun the full numerical model. This approach, often referred to as surro-
gate modeling or emulation, is becoming more common, particularly in domains
where large parameter exploration or real-time predictions are needed. Using neu-
ral network to approximate the behavior of complex models can drastically reduce
computation times, allowing the growth of numerical simulations.
PlanetS members have used model emulation to predict architecture of planetary
systems as seen in Sect. 2.3, but also to predict planetary radii from internal struc-
ture model (Sect. 4.1) and planetary mass from planetary formation model (Sect. 4.2).




4.1 plaNETic: a predictive model for planetary interior structure

A central question in exoplanet research is what the interiors of exoplanets look
like. On the one hand, this is because the detected exoplanet population exhibits
a remarkable diversity in mass and radius, with many of the discovered planets
not having analogues in the solar system. On the other, exoplanet interiors are
shaped by the properties of the protoplanetary discs in which they formed, as well
as their formation locations, orbital migration, and evolution histories. As a result,
studying the composition of exoplanets can give us insights into planet formation
and evolution processes, although the exact connection remains complex. One of the
main challenges when trying to study exoplanet interiors is the inherent degeneracy
in determining a planet’s internal composition from observations. Generally, our
knowledge of the properties of exoplanets from observations is sparse; in most cases,
we will be limited to knowing a planet’s radius and mass, giving us an estimate of its
main density, and its orbital period, informing us of its temperature. While this gives
us a general idea of what the planet could look like, there is a very large number
of interior compositions that would be compatible with these observed quantities
[e.g. 137, 138]. Without additional observations, we cannot break this degeneracy,
no matter how precisely the mass and radius values in question are known. We can,
however, try to reduce it by excluding structures that are unphysical and using any
additional information available, such as the composition of the planet’s host star
[e.g. 139].
To this end, a wide variety of planetary structure models have been developed over the
last two decades to describe mass–radius relations of various types of planets [e.g.,
140, 137, 141, 142, 139, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149]. Traditionally, Bayesian
inference algorithms, such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, have
18                                                                        Davoult et al.

been used in combination with these forward models to infer the internal structures
of observed exoplanets [e.g., 139, 143, 146, 149]. However, MCMC-based inference
schemes require significant computational resources, often taking hours or days to
converge.
More recently, also ML approaches have been used to infer the internal structure of
observed exoplanets. [150] provided proof-of-concept for using a mixture density
network to predict the parameter space of compatible interior structures, with their
newer work presenting a more physically elaborate model [151]. Similarly, [152] train
a conditional invertible neural network with the same purpose. The main advantage
of these methods over traditional inference schemes is that the inference can be
completed within seconds [151] or minutes [152]. While these previous works use
ML to replace the full inverse scheme, the open-source plaNETic framework1 [153]
instead replaces the forward model with a neural network (NN).
plaNETic is based on the planetary structure model of the BICEPS code [149],
which was used generate a large database of 15 million planetary structure models
as training data for a conventional feed-forward NN with multiple hidden layers.
Once trained, this NN is then used as a computationally efficient surrogate model
for the planetary structure model in a full-grid accept-reject sampling scheme. The
trained NN can predict planetary radii up to 50 000 times faster than direct numerical
solutions of the planetary structure equations. A proof-of-concept of the method was
introduced and applied to a system of observed planets for the first time in [154],
while the updated version of the framework, featuring the full physical complexity
of the BICEPS planetary structure model, was presented in [153], along with its
first application to an observed planetary system. Both versions of the framework
together have been applied to infer the interiors of exoplanets in various systems,
presented in more than 30 publications [e.g., 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160]. Some
of these results are summarised in more detail in the chapter by Leleu et al. from the
same collection.
Compared to the hours or days that are needed for the inference process with MCMC,
with plaNETic it takes less than 30 minutes to infer the interior structure of an
observed planet.



4.2 Accelerating planetary system formation models with DNNs

Computing the formation of planetary systems in the Bern model relies on different
modules (see chapter by Kessler et al., this collection): the structure and evolution
of the protoplanetary disk, the accretion of solids and gas, or the planet-planet
interaction among others. One of these modules is the determination of the gas
accretion of forming planets. Gas accretion result from two effects: 1- a planet
accreting solids (planetesimals and pebbles) shows an increase gravitational potential
well, which tends to contract the planetary envelope, while 2- the outer edge of the

1 https://github.com/joannegger/plaNETic
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science                            19

planet (which depends on the planetary Roche and/or Bondi radius) increases with
the planetary mass. Computing gas accretion of a given planet therefore requires
determining the total planetary mass such as the outer planetary radius matches its
outer radius (Roche radius or Bondi radius). This boils down to computing, as a
function of several parameters, the total planetary mass that fulfils all the boundary
conditions (core mass, core luminosity, disk temperature and pressure at the planet
location, planet location itself). Such computation is done by solving the differential
equations describing the internal structure of a planet (similar to the ones used in the
previous section - but with different boundary conditions) using an iterative scheme.
The planetary mass is the value that allows matching all boundary conditions2 . The
other approach often used in the litterature is to use scaling lows (e.g. [162]), but
these laws turn out to be rather imprecise.
When computing the formation of a planetary system, the internal structure of
planetary systems is computed millions of times (for all planets at each timestep),
with boundary conditions that are not extremely different from one case to another.
In order to accelerate this computation, members of the NCCR PlanetS have trained a
DNN that predicts the mass of a planet as a function of the accretion rate of solids, the
core mass, and the disk properties at the location of the planet. The approach followed
is similar to the ones presented in the previous section, with 1- the computation of
a large database of models, and 2- the training of a DNN (see [163]). Using this
approach, the authors demonstrated very good performances compared to scaling
laws, speeding up the internal structure calculations by orders of magnitude [see
e.g., 164].



5 Discussion and conclusion

Machine Learning is fundamentally changing scientific research, including (exo)plane-
tary sciences, by enabling the processing and analysis of vast datasets at unprece-
dented speeds and scales. Machine learning helps automate tedious, time-consuming
tasks, like the identification of small geologic features in planetary image datasets,
and significantly lowers the computing costs of complex models. Over the past
few decades, ML has changed how we analyze data by making it easier to handle
complex, heterogeneous, multi- and hyper-dimensional information and recognize
patterns that might be, or a highly likely to be, missed by humans. More specifi-
cally, ML provides new approaches for analyzing atmospheric compositions [e.g.,
165, 166, 167, 168, 169] or helping prioritize targets for follow-up observations
[e.g., 167, 55] Compared to traditional statistical methods, ML models show gener-
ally stronger predictive capabilities and can handle larger, more heterogeneous, and
more complex datasets. On the other hand, traditional statistical methods provide
clear insights and straightforward explainability about what the model has learned
and offer better interpretability and theoretical understanding, while ML models can

2 Note that there are in general more than one values that allow matching all conditions - see [161]
20                                                                         Davoult et al.

behave like ‘black boxes’. This underlines how the use of data-driven approaches has
to remain a trade-off between model complexity and scientific interpretability.
Many challenges in using ML for (exo)planetary science remain, especially due to
the limited amount and quality of available data. In many areas of (exo)planetary
science, there are not enough data for training models—whether it is the number of
known exoplanets, labeled images of planetary surfaces, asteroid observations, or
atmospheric spectra. On top of that, data often come with noise, vary in quality, and
suffer from other instrument-related limitations. Because of this, scientists increas-
ingly rely on synthetic data to fill the gaps, but that might lead to training on data
that are not exactly like reality and a difficulty to verify hypothesis due to lack of
actual ground-truth data [see e.g., 55]. Finally, models also risk overfitting, meaning
they work well on the training data but fail when applied to new situations or larger
datasets.
To move forward, we need ML models that are easier to interpret, and more and
better data, which may come from upcoming space missions like PLATO, ARIEL,
Europa Clipper, and BepiColombo [170], or new ground-based telescopes like the
ELT
As ML changes (exo)planetary science, it also raises ethical issues. We need trans-
parency in how ML methods and results are shared, and human insight and intuition
should remain central in scientific work. There are also risks, like hidden biases in
training data or incorrect results that could mislead research. It is also important
to mention that most ML and DL algorithms currently offer limited mechanisms
for incorporating uncertainties or propagating errors. This limitation is particularly
relevant in scientific contexts, where quantifying uncertainty is often as critical as
producing accurate predictions. Bridging this gap remains an important work for
future ML and DL research and development.
Even with these challenges, ML and DL are reshaping how we explore space and plan
missions. New algorithms help create better target lists for missions like JWST, the
Habitable Worlds Observatory [HWO; 171, 172], and the Trace Gas Orbiter [TGO,
2016; 173], making better use of valuable telescope time [e.g., 121, 174, 55],
supporting real-time decisions during missions [recently e.g., 131, 175, 176], and
improving how we design observations [e.g., 177].
This chapter presents twelve different areas in which PlanetS members have con-
tributed by incorporating ML models to their work. It encompasses projects using
sequence modeling such as the modeling of stellar activity in RV time-series, the
detection of TTVs in stellar light-curves, the detection of exoplanets in high-contrast
imaging using ADI, and the modeling of planetary systems as a 2D-sequence. We
also gathered projects using pattern recognition such as unveiling correlations in
planetary systems, mapping planetary surfaces, the search for patterns linked to
molecular signatures in cross correlation in high-contrast spectroscopy, and cluster-
ing techniques for mass spectra. Finally, we present works using neural networks
for model emulation to predict planetary radius from internal structure models and
planetary mass from planetary formation models.
Despite new challenges arising with the increasing use of ML and DL models, those
techniques can help reach goals precedently unreachable. For example, the improve-
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science             21

ment of Earth-like planet detection [e.g., 178, 39, 179, 180, 174] can ultimately
allow us to detect an exoplanet favourable to host life. Another example is the scan-
ning of complete datasets of planetary surfaces orders of magnitude faster than a
human.

   Machine learning is changing the way we analyze planetary data and expanding
the kinds of questions we can ask about the origins and future of the solar system
and others. As our tools become more advanced, so does our ability to explore and
understand planetary bodies.



References

  [1] P.H. Abelson, Science 149(3689), 1179 (1965).                        DOI
      10.1126/science.149.3689.1179
  [2] J.A. Dunne, E. Burgess, The voyage of Mariner 10 : mission to Venus and Mer-
      cury, vol. 424 (Washington : Scientific and Technical Information Division,
      National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1978)
  [3] J. Bailey, arXiv e-prints arXiv:1302.3675 (2013).                    DOI
      10.48550/arXiv.1302.3675
  [4] P.H. Abelson, Science 197(4308), 1039 (1977).                        DOI
      10.1126/science.197.4308.1039
  [5] C.E. Kohlhase, P.A. Penzo, Space Science Reviews21(2), 77 (1977). DOI
      10.1007/BF00200846
  [6] W.J. Borucki, D. Koch, G. Basri, et al., Science 327(5968), 977 (2010). DOI
      10.1126/science.1185402
  [7] G.R. Ricker, J.N. Winn, R. Vanderspek, et al., Journal of Astronom-
      ical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 1, 014003 (2015). DOI
      10.1117/1.JATIS.1.1.014003
  [8] S.J. Bolton, J. Lunine, D. Stevenson, et al., Space Science Reviews213(1-4),
      5 (2017). DOI 10.1007/s11214-017-0429-6
  [9] J.P. Gardner, J.C. Mather, M. Clampin, et al., Space Science Reviews123(4),
      485 (2006). DOI 10.1007/s11214-006-8315-7
 [10] D.S. Lauretta, S.S. Balram-Knutson, E. Beshore, et al., Space Science Re-
      views212(1-2), 925 (2017). DOI 10.1007/s11214-017-0405-1
 [11] A.F. Cheng, A.S. Rivkin, P. Michel, et al., Planetary and Space Science157,
      104 (2018). DOI 10.1016/j.pss.2018.02.015
 [12] K.J. Walsh, A. Morbidelli, S.N. Raymond, et al., Meteoritics & Planetary
      Science47(12), 1941 (2012). DOI 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2012.01418.x
 [13] R. Gomes, H.F. Levison, K. Tsiganis, A. Morbidelli, Nature435(7041), 466
      (2005). DOI 10.1038/nature03676
 [14] K. Tsiganis, R. Gomes, A. Morbidelli, H.F. Levison, Nature435(7041), 459
      (2005). DOI 10.1038/nature03539
22                                                                       Davoult et al.

 [15] A. Morbidelli, H.F. Levison, K. Tsiganis, R. Gomes, Nature435(7041), 462
      (2005). DOI 10.1038/nature03540
 [16] A. Adcroft, J.M. Campin, C. Hill, J. Marshall, Monthly Weather Review
      132(12), 2845 (2004). DOI 10.1175/MWR2823.1
 [17] M.I. Richardson, A.D. Toigo, C.E. Newman, Journal of Geophysical Research
      (Planets) 112(E9), E09001 (2007). DOI 10.1029/2006JE002825
 [18] G. Gilli, S. Lebonnois, F. González-Galindo, et al., Icarus281, 55 (2017). DOI
      10.1016/j.icarus.2016.09.016
 [19] M. Timpe, C. Reinhardt, T. Meier, et al., The Astrophysical Journal959(1),
      38 (2023). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/acfc40
 [20] T. Meier, C. Reinhardt, M. Timpe, et al., The Astrophysical Journal978(1),
      11 (2025). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9248
 [21] J. Weder, C. Mordasini, A. Emsenhuber, Astronomy & Astrophysics674,
      A165 (2023). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202243453
 [22] A.S. McEwen, E.M. Eliason, J.W. Bergstrom, et al., Journal of Geophysical
      Research (Planets) 112(E5), E05S02 (2007). DOI 10.1029/2005JE002605
 [23] Gaia Collaboration, T. Prusti, J.H.J. de Bruijne, et al., Astronomy & Astro-
      physics595, A1 (2016). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201629272
 [24] S.M. Howell, R.T. Pappalardo, Nature Communications 11, 1311 (2020). DOI
      10.1038/s41467-020-15160-9
 [25] O. Grasset, M.K. Dougherty, A. Coustenis, et al., Planetary and Space Sci-
      ence78, 1 (2013). DOI 10.1016/j.pss.2012.12.002
 [26] H. Rauer, C. Catala, C. Aerts, et al., Experimental Astronomy 38(1-2), 249
      (2014). DOI 10.1007/s10686-014-9383-4
 [27] H. Rauer, C. Aerts, J. Cabrera, PLATO Team, Astronomische Nachrichten
      337(8-9), 961 (2016). DOI 10.1002/asna.201612408
 [28] G. Tinetti, P. Eccleston, T. Lueftinger, et al., in European Planetary Science
      Congress (2022), pp. EPSC2022–1114. DOI 10.5194/epsc2022-1114
 [29] D.G. York, J. Adelman, J.E. Anderson, Jr., et al., The Astronomical Jour-
      nal120(3), 1579 (2000). DOI 10.1086/301513
 [30] R.K. Gulati, L. Altamirano, Astrophysics and Space Science273, 73 (2000).
      DOI 10.1023/A:1002699908879
 [31] G. Li, Z. Lu, J. Wang, Z. Wang, arXiv e-prints arXiv:2502.15300 (2025). DOI
      10.48550/arXiv.2502.15300
 [32] B.D. Bue, T.F. Stepinski, Computers and Geosciences 32(5), 604 (2006). DOI
      10.1016/j.cageo.2005.09.004
 [33] T.F. Stepinski, S. Ghosh, R. Vilalta, in Discovery Science, ed. by L. Todor-
      ovski, N. Lavrač, K.P. Jantke (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
      2006), pp. 255–266
 [34] T. Stepinski, R. Vilalta, S. Ghosh, IEEE Intelligent Systems 22(6), 100 (2007).
      DOI 10.1109/MIS.2007.114
 [35] T.F. Stepinski, M.P. Mendenhall, B.D. Bue, Icarus203(1), 77 (2009). DOI
      10.1016/j.icarus.2009.04.026
 [36] M.S. Gilmore, R. Castaño, T. Mann, et al., Journal of Geophysical Re-
      search105(E12), 29223 (2000). DOI 10.1029/2000JE001275
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science            23

 [37] B. Bornstein, R. Castano, M. Gilmore, et al., in 2005 IEEE Aerospace Con-
      ference (2005), pp. 378–384. DOI 10.1109/AERO.2005.1559330
 [38] M.S. Gilmore, B. Bornstein, M.D. Merrill, et al., Icarus 195(1),
      169 (2008).       DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2007.11.025.       URL
      https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019103507005982
 [39] Y. Zhao, X. Dumusque, M. Cretignier, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics687,
      A281 (2024). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202450022
 [40] E. Agol, J. Steffen, R. Sari, W. Clarkson, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
      nomical Society359(2), 567 (2005). DOI 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.08922.x
 [41] Y. Lithwick, J. Xie, Y. Wu, The Astrophysical Journal761(2), 122 (2012).
      DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/761/2/122
 [42] D. Nesvorný, D. Vokrouhlický, The Astrophysical Journal790(1), 58 (2014).
      DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/790/1/58
 [43] E. Agol, K. Deck, The Astrophysical Journal818(2), 177 (2016). DOI
      10.3847/0004-637X/818/2/177
 [44] D. Nesvorný, D. Kipping, D. Terrell, et al., The Astrophysical Journal777(1),
      3 (2013). DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/777/1/3
 [45] J.W. Xie, Y. Wu, Y. Lithwick, The Astrophysical Journal789(2), 165 (2014).
      DOI 10.1088/0004-637X/789/2/165
 [46] W. Zhu, C. Petrovich, Y. Wu, et al., The Astrophysical Journal860(2), 101
      (2018). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/aac6d5
 [47] A. Leleu, G. Chatel, S. Udry, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics655, A66
      (2021). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202141471
 [48] J.A. Carter, E. Agol, W.J. Chaplin, et al., Science 337(6094), 556 (2012). DOI
      10.1126/science.1223269
 [49] S. Jégou, M. Drozdzal, D. Vazquez, et al., arXiv e-prints arXiv:1611.09326
      (2016). DOI 10.48550/arXiv.1611.09326
 [50] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, arXiv e-prints arXiv:1505.04597 (2015).
      DOI 10.48550/arXiv.1505.04597
 [51] A. Leleu, J.B. Delisle, R. Mardling, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics661,
      A141 (2022). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202142822
 [52] A. Leleu, J.B. Delisle, S. Udry, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics669, A117
      (2023). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202244132
 [53] A. Leleu, J.B. Delisle, R. Burn, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics687, L1
      (2024). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202450587
 [54] J. Davoult, Y. Alibert, L. Mishra, Astronomy & Astrophysics689, A309
      (2024). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202449330
 [55] J. Davoult, R. Eltschinger, Y. Alibert, Astronomy & Astrophysics696, A94
      (2025). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202452434
 [56] A. Emsenhuber, C. Mordasini, M. Mayor, et al., Astronomy & Astro-
      physics701, A64 (2025). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202452485
 [57] Y. Alibert, F. Carron, A. Fortier, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics558, A109
      (2013). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201321690
 [58] A. Emsenhuber, C. Mordasini, R. Burn, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics656,
      A69 (2021). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202038553
24                                                               Davoult et al.

 [59] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, et al., arXiv e-prints arXiv:1706.03762
      (2017). DOI 10.48550/arXiv.1706.03762
 [60] R. Soummer, Astrophysical Journal Letters618, 161 (2005).              DOI
      10.1086/427923. URL https://doi.org/10.1086/427923
 [61] C. Marois, D. Lafreniere, R. Doyon, et al., ApJ 641(1), 556 (2006)
 [62] C. Cantero, O. Absil, C.H. Dahlqvist, M. Van Droogenbroeck, Astronomy &
      Astrophysics680, A86 (2023). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202346085. URL
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202346085
 [63] F. Cantalloube, C. Gomez-Gonzalez, O. Absil, et al., in Adaptive Optics
      Systems VII, ed. by D. Schmidt, L. Schreiber, E. Vernet (SPIE, 2020), p. 321.
      DOI 10.1117/12.2574803. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.2574803
 [64] S. Desidera, G. Chauvin, M. Bonavita, et al., Astronomy & Astro-
      physics651, A70 (2021). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202038806. URL
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202038806
 [65] V. Christiaens, C.A.G. Gonzalez, R. Farkas, et al., Journal of Open
      Source Software 8(81), 1 (2023). DOI 10.21105/joss.04774. URL
      https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.04774
 [66] M.J. Bonse, T.D. Gebhard, F.A. Dannert, et al., The Astronomical Jour-
      nal169(4), 194 (2025). DOI 10.3847/1538-3881/adab79
 [67] M. Auvergne, P. Bodin, L. Boisnard, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics506(1),
      411 (2009). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/200810860
 [68] G. Gonzalez, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society285(2), 403
      (1997). DOI 10.1093/mnras/285.2.403
 [69] N.C. Santos, G. Israelian, M. Mayor, arXiv e-prints astro-ph/0109018 (2001).
      DOI 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0109018
 [70] J.B. Pollack, O. Hubickyj, P. Bodenheimer, et al., Icarus
      124(1), 62 (1996).             DOI 10.1006/ICAR.1996.0190.              URL
      https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019103596901906?via%3Dihub
 [71] R.I. Dawson, R.A. Murray-Clay, Astrophysical Journal Letters767(2), L24
      (2013). DOI 10.1088/2041-8205/767/2/L24
 [72] J.A. Johnson, K.M. Aller, A.W. Howard, J.R. Crepp, Publications of the As-
      tronomical Society of the Pacific122(894), 905 (2010). DOI 10.1086/655775
 [73] X. Bonfils, X. Delfosse, S. Udry, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics549, A109
      (2013). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201014704
 [74] E. Melo, D. Souto, K. Cunha, et al., The Astrophysical Journal973(2), 90
      (2024). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/ad5004
 [75] S. Yun, Y.S. Lee, Y.K. Kim, et al., The Astrophysical Journal971(1), 35
      (2024). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/ad5722
 [76] L. Mishra, Y. Alibert, S. Udry, C. Mordasini, Astronomy & Astrophysics670,
      A69 (2023). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202244705
 [77] A. Emsenhuber, C. Mordasini, R. Burn, European Physical Journal Plus
      138(2), 181 (2023). DOI 10.1140/epjp/s13360-023-03784-x
 [78] V.T. Bickel, C. Lanaras, A. Manconi, et al., IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
      and Remote Sensing 57(6), 3501 (2019). DOI 10.1109/TGRS.2018.2885280
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science             25

 [79] V.T. Bickel, S.J. Conway, P.A. Tesson, et al., IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
      in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 13, 2831 (2020). DOI
      10.1109/JSTARS.2020.2991588
 [80] V.T. Bickel, J. Aaron, A. Manconi, et al., Nature Communications 11, 2862
      (2020). DOI 10.1038/s41467-020-16653-3
 [81] V.T. Bickel, J. Aaron, A. Manconi, S. Loew, Journal of Geophysical Research
      (Planets) 126(10), e06824 (2021). DOI 10.1029/2021JE006824
 [82] V.T. Bickel, I.J. Daubar, A.J. Sokolowska, et al., Geophysical Research Let-
      ters51(24), 2024GL110674 (2024). DOI 10.1029/2024GL110674
 [83] V.T. Bickel, S. Loew, J. Aaron, N. Goedhart, Geophysical Research Let-
      ters49(12), e98812 (2022). DOI 10.1029/2022GL098812
 [84] O. Rüsch, V.T. Bickel, The Planetary Science Journal4(7), 126 (2023). DOI
      10.3847/PSJ/acd1ef
 [85] O. Rüsch, M. Hess, C. Wöhler, et al., Journal of Geophysical Research (Plan-
      ets) 129(1), e2023JE007910 (2024). DOI 10.1029/2023JE007910
 [86] B. Aussel, O. Rüsch, B. Gundlach, et al., in European Planetary Science
      Congress (2024), pp. EPSC2024–998. DOI 10.5194/epsc2024-998
 [87] M.M. Mills, V.T. Bickel, A.S. McEwen, A. Valantinas, Icarus418, 116145
      (2024). DOI 10.1016/j.icarus.2024.116145
 [88] V.T. Bickel, N. Thomas, A. Pommerol, et al., Nature Scientific Data 11, 845
      (2024)
 [89] K.L. Wagstaff, I.J. Daubar, G. Doran, et al., Icarus386, 115146 (2022). DOI
      10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115146
 [90] V.T. Bickel, I.J. Daubar, G. Zenhäusern, et al., Geophysical Research Letters
      52, 3 (2025)
 [91] C.      Charalambous,      W.T.       Pike,     B.     Fernando,     et    al.,
      Geophysical         Research       Letters        52(3),      e2024GL110159
      (2025).          DOI https://doi.org/10.1029/2024GL110159.               URL
      https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2024GL110159.
      E2024GL110159 2024GL110159
 [92] S. Conway, V.T. Bickel, M. Patel, et al., Planetary and Space Science ((in
      review))
 [93] V.T. Bickel, A.N. Deutsch, D.T. Blewett, Journal of Geophysical Re-
      search Machine Learning and Computation 2(1), 431 (2025). DOI
      10.1029/2024JH000431
 [94] A.N. Deutsch, V.T. Bickel, D.T. Blewett, Journal of Geophysical Research
      (Planets) 130(2), 2024JE008747 (2025). DOI 10.1029/2024JE008747
 [95] V.T. Bickel, L. Mandrake, G. Doran, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and
      Remote Sensing 182, 1 (2021). DOI 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2021.09.018
 [96] V.T. Bickel, L. Mandrake, G. Doran, Frontiers in Remote Sensing 2, 640034
      (2021). DOI 10.3389/frsen.2021.640034
 [97] A. Lesnikowski, V.T. Bickel, D. Angerhausen, IEEE Journal of Selected Top-
      ics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 17, 6589 (2024). DOI
      10.1109/JSTARS.2024.3369101
26                                                                     Davoult et al.

 [98] C. Haslebacher, N. Thomas, V.T. Bickel, Icarus 410(115722)
      (2024).        DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2023.115722.        URL
      https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019103523002993
 [99] C. Haslebacher, J. Gamazo Tejero, L.M. Prockter, et al., PSJ under review
      (2025)
[100] P.H. Figueredo, R. Greeley, Icarus 167(2), 287 (2004).                 DOI
      10.1016/J.ICARUS.2003.09.016
[101] A.R. Sarid, R. Greenberg, G.V. Hoppa, et al., Icarus 168(1), 144 (2004). DOI
      10.1016/j.icarus.2003.11.021
[102] S.A. Kattenhorn, Icarus 157(2), 490 (2002)
[103] G.W. Patterson, J.W. Head, R.T. Pappalardo, Journal of Structural Geology
      28(12), 2237 (2006). DOI 10.1016/J.JSG.2006.03.032
[104] A.R. Rhoden, T.A. Hurford, Icarus 226(1), 841 (2013).                  DOI
      10.1016/J.ICARUS.2013.06.029
[105] G.C. Collins, G.W. Patterson, C.E. Detelich, et al., JGR: Planets 127(11)
      (2022). DOI 10.1029/2022JE007492
[106] E. Turtle, A. McEwen, G. Patterson, et al., Space Science Reviews, Col-
      lection ” Europa Clipper: A Mission to Explore Ocean World Habitabil-
      ity” 220 (2024). DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-024-01115-9. URL
      https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1423-5751
[107] I.J. Daubar, A.G. Hayes, G.C. Collins, et al., SSR 220(1),
      1 (2024).          DOI 10.1007/S11214-023-01036-Z/METRICS.              URL
      https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11214-023-01036-z
[108] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, arXiv (2018).              URL
      https://github.com/
[109] C. Haslebacher, N. Thomas, C. Rossi, et al., in Atlas of Geological Planetary
      Mapping, ed. by L. Marinangeli, M. Pantaloni (2025), chap. (under review)
[110] C. Haslebacher, L. Dümbgen, A.R. Rhoden, et al., (in prep.) (2025)
[111] M.R. Line, K.B. Stevenson, J. Bean, et al., AJ 152(6), 203 (2016)
[112] M. Brogi, M.R. Line, AJ 157(3), 114 (2019)
[113] M. Nowak, S. Lacour, P. Mollière, et al., A&A 633, A110 (2020)
[114] P. Mollière, T. Molyarova, B. Bitsch, et al., ApJ 934(1), 74 (2022).
      DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6a56. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-
      4357/ac6a56
[115] Q.M. Konopacky, T.S. Barman, B.A. Macintosh, C. Marois, Science
      339(6126), 1398 (2013)
[116] R.J. de Kok, M. Brogi, I.A. Snellen, et al., A&A 554, A82 (2013)
[117] P. Mollière, I. Snellen, Astronomy & Astrophysics 622, A139 (2019)
[118] G. Cugno, P. Patapis, T. Stolker, et al., A&A 653, A12 (2021)
[119] M. Mâlin, A. Boccaletti, B. Charnay, et al., A&A 671, A109 (2023)
[120] M.J. Bonse, E.O. Garvin, T.D. Gebhard, et al., AJ 166(2), 71 (2023).
      DOI 10.3847/1538-3881/acc93c. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-
      3881/acc93c
[121] E.O. Garvin, M.J. Bonse, J. Hayoz, et al., A & A 689, A143 (2024)
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science              27

[122] R. Nath-Ranga, O. Absil, V. Christiaens, E.O. Garvin, Astronomy & Astro-
      physics 689, A142 (2024)
[123] P. Patapis, E. Nasedkin, G. Cugno, et al., A&A 658, A72 (2022)
[124] J. Hayoz, M.J. Bonse, F. Dannert, et al., arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19961
      (2025)
[125] M. Houllé, A. Vigan, A. Carlotti, et al., A&A 652, A67 (2021)
[126] A. Bidot, D. Mouillet, A. Carlotti, A&A 682, A10 (2024)
[127] S.R. Vaughan, J.L. Birkby, N. Thatte, et al., MNRAS 528(2), 3509 (2024)
[128] R.J. de Kok, J. Birkby, M. Brogi, et al., A&A 561, A150 (2014)
[129] D. Petit dit de la Roche, H. Hoeijmakers, I. Snellen, A&A 616, A146 (2018)
[130] L. Boldt-Christmas, F. Lesjak, A. Wehrhahn, et al., A&A 683, A244 (2024)
[131] S. Gruchola, P.K. Schmidt, M. Tulej, et al., The Planetary Science Jour-
      nal5(12), 280 (2024). DOI 10.3847/PSJ/ad90b6
[132] R.A. Lukmanov, A. Riedo, D. Wacey, et al., Frontiers in Ar-
      tificial Intelligence 4 (2021).              DOI 10.3389/frai.2021.668163.
      URL                             https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/artificial-
      intelligence/articles/10.3389/frai.2021.668163
[133] A. Riedo, A. Bieler, M. Neuland, et al., Journal of Mass Spectrometry 48(1),
      i (2013). DOI 10.1002/jms.3157
[134] G. Labrèche, D. Evans, D. Marszk, et al., in 2022 IEEE Aerospace Conference
      (AERO) (2022), pp. 1–17. DOI 10.1109/AERO53065.2022.9843402
[135] J. Murphy, J.E. Ward, B. Mac Namee, in 2023 European Data Han-
      dling & Data Processing Conference (EDHPC) (2023), pp. 1–6. DOI
      10.23919/EDHPC59100.2023.10396403
[136] V. Ružička, A. Vaughan, D. De Martini, et al., Scientific Reports 12, 16939
      (2022). DOI 10.1038/s41598-022-19437-5
[137] S. Seager, M. Kuchner, C.A. Hier-Majumder, B. Militzer, The Astrophysical
      Journal669(2), 1279 (2007). DOI 10.1086/521346
[138] L.A. Rogers, S. Seager, The Astrophysical Journal712(2), 974 (2010). DOI
      10.1088/0004-637X/712/2/974
[139] C. Dorn, A. Khan, K. Heng, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics577, A83 (2015).
      DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201424915
[140] D. Valencia, R.J. O’Connell, D. Sasselov, Icarus181(2), 545 (2006). DOI
      10.1016/j.icarus.2005.11.021
[141] C. Sotin, O. Grasset, A. Mocquet, Icarus191(1), 337 (2007). DOI
      10.1016/j.icarus.2007.04.006
[142] J.J. Fortney, M.S. Marley, J.W. Barnes, The Astrophysical Journal659(2),
      1661 (2007). DOI 10.1086/512120
[143] C. Dorn, J. Venturini, A. Khan, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics597, A37
      (2017). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201628708
[144] L. Zeng, D.D. Sasselov, S.B. Jacobsen, The Astrophysical Journal819(2), 127
      (2016). DOI 10.3847/0004-637X/819/2/127
[145] B. Brugger, O. Mousis, M. Deleuil, F. Deschamps, The Astrophysical Jour-
      nal850(1), 93 (2017). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/aa965a
28                                                                    Davoult et al.

[146] L. Acuña, M. Deleuil, O. Mousis, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics647, A53
      (2021). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202039885
[147] A. Aguichine, O. Mousis, M. Deleuil, E. Marcq, The Astrophysical Jour-
      nal914(2), 84 (2021). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/abfa99
[148] C. Dorn, T. Lichtenberg, Astrophysical Journal Letters922(1), L4 (2021). DOI
      10.3847/2041-8213/ac33af
[149] J. Haldemann, C. Dorn, J. Venturini, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics681,
      A96 (2024). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202346965
[150] P. Baumeister, S. Padovan, N. Tosi, et al., The Astrophysical Journal889(1),
      42 (2020). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5d32
[151] P. Baumeister, N. Tosi, Astronomy & Astrophysics676, A106 (2023). DOI
      10.1051/0004-6361/202346216
[152] J. Haldemann, V. Ksoll, D. Walter, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics672,
      A180 (2023). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202243230
[153] J.A. Egger, H.P. Osborn, D. Kubyshkina, et al., Astronomy & Astro-
      physics688, A223 (2024). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202450472
[154] A. Leleu, Y. Alibert, N.C. Hara, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics649, A26
      (2021). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202039767
[155] A. Bonfanti, D. Gandolfi, J.A. Egger, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics671,
      L8 (2023). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202245607
[156] J.A. Patel, J.A. Egger, T.G. Wilson, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics679,
      A92 (2023). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202244946
[157] R. Luque, H.P. Osborn, A. Leleu, et al., Nature623(7989), 932 (2023). DOI
      10.1038/s41586-023-06692-3
[158] A. Bonfanti, I. Amateis, D. Gandolfi, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics693,
      A90 (2025). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202451300
[159] M. Stalport, A. Mortier, M. Cretignier, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics696,
      A86 (2025). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202452969
[160] T. Zingales, L. Malavolta, L. Borsato, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics695,
      A273 (2025). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202451180
[161] J. Venturini, Y. Alibert, W. Benz, M. Ikoma, Astronomy & Astrophysics576,
      A114 (2015). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201424008
[162] B. Bitsch, M. Lambrechts, A. Johansen, Astronomy & Astrophysics582, A112
      (2015). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/201526463
[163] Y. Alibert, J. Venturini, Astronomy & Astrophysics626, A21 (2019). DOI
      10.1051/0004-6361/201834942
[164] J. Venturini, O.M. Guilera, J. Haldemann, et al., Astronomy & Astro-
      physics643, L1 (2020). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202039141
[165] F. Giobergia, A. Koudounas, E. Baralis, arXiv e-prints arXiv:2310.01227
      (2023). DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2310.01227
[166] R.T. Forestano, K.T. Matchev, K. Matcheva, E.B. Unlu, The Astrophysical
      Journal958(2), 106 (2023). DOI 10.3847/1538-4357/ad0047
[167] D.S. Duque-Castaño, J.I. Zuluaga, L. Flor-Torres, Monthly Notices of the
      Royal Astronomical Society539(2), 1528 (2025). DOI 10.1093/mnras/staf563
Machine Learning as a Transformative Tool for (Exo-)Planetary Science            29

[168] D. Dahlbüdding, K. Molaverdikhani, B. Ercolano, T. Grassi, Monthly
      Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society533(3), 3475 (2024). DOI
      10.1093/mnras/stae1872
[169] T.D. Gebhard, J. Wildberger, M. Dax, et al., Astronomy & Astrophysics693,
      A42 (2025). DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202451861
[170] J. Benkhoff, J. van Casteren, H. Hayakawa, et al., Planetary and Space Sci-
      ence58(1-2), 2 (2010). DOI 10.1016/j.pss.2009.09.020
[171] C.K. Harada, C.D. Dressing, S.R. Kane, B.A. Ardestani, The Astrophys-
      ical Journal Supplement Series272(2), 30 (2024). DOI 10.3847/1538-
      4365/ad3e81
[172] C.C. Stark, B. Mennesson, S. Bryson, et al., arXiv e-prints arXiv:2405.19418
      (2024). DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2405.19418
[173] J. Vago, O. Witasse, H. Svedhem, et al., Solar System Research 49(7), 518
      (2015). DOI 10.1134/S0038094615070199
[174] A.R. Torres-Quijano, N.R. Hinkel, C.H. Wheeler, III, et al., arXiv e-prints
      arXiv:2502.17563 (2025). DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2502.17563
[175] C. McDonnell, M. Arana-Catania, S. Upadhyay, arXiv e-prints
      arXiv:2403.00470 (2024). DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2403.00470
[176] L. Cao, P. Jia, J. Li, et al., The Astronomical Journal169(4), 215 (2025). DOI
      10.3847/1538-3881/adb842
[177] Y.Y. Li, Y. Bai, C. Wang, et al., Intelligent Computing
      4, 0110 (2025).                  DOI 10.34133/icomputing.0110.            URL
      https://spj.science.org/doi/abs/10.34133/icomputing.0110
[178] D.J. Armstrong, J. Gamper, T. Damoulas, Monthly Notices of the Royal
      Astronomical Society504(4), 5327 (2021). DOI 10.1093/mnras/staa2498
[179] J. Roche, The Open Journal of Astrophysics 7, 62 (2024). DOI
      10.33232/001c.121826
[180] B.M.S. Hansen, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society467(2),
      1531 (2017). DOI 10.1093/mnras/stx182
