                                           Clinical-ComBAT: a diffusion-weighted MRI
                                          harmonization method for clinical applications
                                        Gabriel Girard1,2 , Manon Edde1,2 , Félix Dumais1,2 , Yoan David1 ,
arXiv:2511.04871v1 [cs.CV] 6 Nov 2025




                                        Matthieu Dumont3 , Guillaume Theaud3 , Jean-Christophe Houde3 ,
                                        Arnaud Boré2 , Maxime Descoteaux2,3 , and Pierre-Marc Jodoin1,2
                                         1
                                           Videos & Images Theory and Analytics Lab (VITAL), Department of Computer
                                                    Science, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke (Qc), Canada
                                         2
                                           Sherbrooke Connectivity Imaging Lab (SCIL), Department of Computer Science,
                                                         Université de Sherbrooke Sherbrooke (Qc), Canada
                                                          3
                                                            Imeka Solutions inc, Sherbrooke (Qc), Canada


                                                                      November 10, 2025

                                                                              Abstract
                                                 Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DW-MRI) derived
                                             scalar maps are effective for assessing neurodegenerative diseases and mi-
                                             crostructural properties of white matter in large number of brain con-
                                             ditions. However, DW-MRI inherently limits the combination of data
                                             from multiple acquisition sites without harmonization to mitigate scanner-
                                             specific biases. While the widely used ComBAT method reduces site
                                             effects in research, its reliance on linear covariate relationships, homo-
                                             geneous populations, fixed site numbers, and well populated sites con-
                                             strains its clinical use. To overcome these limitations, we propose Clinical-
                                             ComBAT, a method designed for real-world clinical scenarios. Clinical-
                                             ComBAT harmonizes each site independently, enabling flexibility as new
                                             data and clinics are introduced. It incorporates a non-linear polynomial
                                             data model, site-specific harmonization referenced to a normative site,
                                             and variance priors adaptable to small cohorts. It further includes hy-
                                             perparameter tuning and a goodness-of-fit metric for harmonization as-
                                             sessment. We demonstrate its effectiveness on simulated and real data,
                                             showing improved alignment of diffusion metrics and enhanced applica-
                                             bility for normative modeling.

                                          Keywords: Harmonization, Diffusion-weighted MRI, White matter, Com-
                                        BAT




                                                                                  1
1    Introduction
Neuroimaging studies increasingly use multicenter Diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-
MRI) data along with normative modeling [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Normative modeling is a
framework designed to map the general trend and variability of a reference pop-
ulation, facilitating statistical analyses for individual participants with specific
diseases. The detection of subtle brain variations requires large datasets to en-
sure robust and sufficient statistical power. However, it is well-established that
DW-MRI data is influenced by site-specific acquisition biases, making cross-
scanner and cross-protocol comparisons of DW-MRI data unreliable without
appropriate data harmonization. Such discrepancies, known as batch effects
[6, 7], arise from various technical variability, including software updates, scan-
ner drift, differences in MRI manufacturer, acquisition protocols, field strength,
and hardware variability [8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
    The objective of harmonization is to derive a transfer function between two or
more sites to eliminate batch effects while preserving covariate expressions, such
as age and sex. Although various harmonization methods have been proposed
[13, 14, 15, 16, 9, 17, 18], many are tailored to specific contexts and may not be
suitable for routine clinical practice, which comes with its own set of challenges.
For example, data from day-to-day clinical practice often originate from patients
with a broad spectrum of diseases and symptoms, unlike clinical studies and
academic research, which typically involve carefully selected participants with
consistent profiles. Additionally, clinical and academic research protocols are
meticulously optimized to achieve the best possible results, with participants
spending extended time in scanners to ensure high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR),
and scanners across sites usually being from the same vendor. This contrasts
with the situation in a network of diverse clinics, where acquisition protocols,
clinical practices, and hardware vary significantly.
    Currently, the predominant method for DW-MRI harmonization is ComBAT
[15, 19]. Unlike other approaches that harmonize the raw diffusion signal [20, 14,
18], ComBAT focuses on harmonizing DW-MRI scalar maps such as Fractional
Anisotropy (FA) and Mean Diffusivity (MD) maps [21, 15, 22], as well as other
features such as cortical thickness and gray matter regions [23, 24]. ComBAT
employs a Bayesian framework to learn the additive and multiplicative biases
of each site, coupled with a linear model that captures the effects of covariates
(see Section 2 and the supplementary materials for more mathematical details).
    Despite its popularity, ComBAT has limitations. As such, over the years,
several derived versions of ComBAT have been proposed to improve the origi-
nal approach. Most of these improved versions tackle the core assumptions of
ComBAT. For instance, ComBAT-GAM [25] counters the linear assumption of
ComBAT using spline-based generalized additive models (GAM). M-ComBAT
[26] harmonizes data to a specific reference (or target) site rather than a global
average. B-ComBAT [26] employs Monte Carlo bootstrapping to robustly es-
timate ComBAT’s parameters, whereas Longitudinal ComBAT [27] integrates
intra-subject temporal information. CoVBat [13] additionally corrects for co-
variance effects besides variance and mean.


                                         2
    While ComBAT is effective in clinical trials and academic research settings, it
is not directly applicable to everyday clinical practice as documented by [28]. In
these settings, participants (human or otherwise) undergo specific interventions
according to a predetermined research plan [29], with data collected at multiple
sites following strict protocols. Moreover, they may also encompass retrospec-
tive research on public datasets [30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38]. ComBAT
generally harmonizes all sites simultaneously, an approach that suits a fixed
number of sites but falls short in a dynamic clinic network where the number
of participants and acquisition sites expand over time. Additionally, ComBAT
presupposes a linear distribution of data with respect to its covariates, which is
often not the case [28]. Moreover, inter-site variability in regression parameters,
such as differences in age-related effects, cannot be captured by the single re-
gression model used in ComBAT [28]. This limitation may cause the ComBAT’s
model to generalize poorly to unseen data, particularly when trained on a small
subject sample or when the subjects cover only a narrow range of covariate
values (e.g. subjects with limited age range) [28].
    These limitations necessitate a specialized harmonization approach for clin-
ical settings, which we introduce as Clinical-ComBAT, a mathematical refor-
mulation of the original ComBAT method. Clinical-ComBAT builds on years
of practical experience harmonizing DW-MRI data across hundreds of hetero-
geneous sites, where direct application of ComBAT proved impractical. The
method addresses these challenges through a simplified data model, polynomial
modeling of data, and site-specific harmonization using a normative reference
site. Like M-ComBAT [26] and Pairwise-ComBAT [28], it aligns each site with
a well-populated reference, avoiding complications associated with increasing
site numbers. The large normative population enables integration of new priors
during model fitting, accurate estimation of the polynomial order, and the use
of goodness-of-fit metrics to assess harmonization quality.
    This study compares Clinical-ComBAT with ComBAT [15] across four datasets,
including three real-world cohorts and one synthetic dataset. Harmonization
was applied to the mean diffusivity (MD) and the fractional anisotropy (FA),
obtained from Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI), and to apparent fiber density
[39] derived from the fiber Orientation Distribution Function (fODF) obtained
from Constrained Spherical Deconvolution [40, 41]. Performance was evaluated
across 42 white matter bundles from the IIT Human Brain Atlas v.5.0 and the
white matter skeleton mask [42].
    The main advances of Clinical-ComBAT over ComBAT can be summarized
as follows:
  1. introduction of a new data formulation model,
  2. integration of a non-linear polynomial basis function at the core of the
     model,
  3. adoption of a revised Bayesian framework for estimating harmonization
     parameters,
  4. use of a quality control harmonization method


                                       3
    5. implementation of an automatic hyperparameter tuning strategy.
All these contributions are summarized into four algorithms (c.f. the Supple-
mentary Materials) and a ready-to-use publicly available code.


2     Methods
2.1     ComBAT fundamentals
ComBAT is a harmonization method initially devised for genomics to counter
batch effects [19]. Its effectiveness in mitigating MRI acquisition effects in
scalar maps from DW-MRI was subsequently demonstrated [15]. Despite its
widespread use, the theoretical underpinnings and implementation of ComBAT
can be perplexing.
    Let Y = {Y1 , Y2 , ..., YI } represent a set of I physical MRI sites, where Yi =
{Yi1 , Yi2 , ..., YiJi } are a set of Ji participants whose brain has been scanned with
the MRI machine i. In voxel-wise harmonization, these participant’s MR images
are usually non-linearly registered to a common space, such as the MNI space
[15]. It’s important to note that the number of participants Ji is site dependent,
as their number varies from one site to another. Each scalar map Yij can be
expressed as Yij = [yij1 , yij2 , ..., yijv ], where v is the number of voxels (or region)
in the common space and yijv ∈ R.
    To mitigate site-specific biases, ComBAT employs a linear model for the
data formation of each voxel (or regions) v as follows:

                          yijv = αv + ⃗xTij β⃗v + γiv + δiv ϵijv ,                    (1)

where αv is the model intercept of the overall population across all sites, xij is
a vector of covariates, βv is the regression coefficient vector, γiv and δiv are the
additive and multiplicative effects of site i, and ϵijv is a random independent
Gaussian noise with ϵijv ∼ N (0, σv2 ). It is crucial to recognize that ComBAT
assumes the regression vector βv (i.e. the slope of the population) is constant for
all sites. The primary goal of ComBAT is to eliminate the site-specific additive
and multiplicative biases (respectively γiv and δiv ) ensuring that the harmonized
population profile conforms to the model
                            ComBAT
                           yijv    = αv + ⃗xTij β⃗v + ϵijv .                          (2)

    Since the parameters of the model αv , βv , γiv and δiv are a priori unknown,
they must be empirically estimated from the data Y . Whenever these parame-
ters can be accurately estimated (namely α̂v , βˆv , γ̂iv , and δ̂iv ), the harmonized
        harm
values yijv   can be computed as follows:

                   harm
                             yijv − α̂v − ⃗xTij β̂v − γ̂iv
                  yijv  =                                    + α̂v + ⃗xTij β̂v .      (3)
                                         δ̂iv



                                                4
    A straightforward approach to estimating these five parameters is the Lo-
cation and Scale (L/S) method [19] that we detailed in section S.1 of the Sup-
plementary Material. While effective, this method has notable limitations in
presence of small populations. These are typically mitigated by the Bayesian
formulation of ComBAT whose mathematical details can be found in section S.2
of the Supplementary Material as well as in previous publications [28, 19, 15].

2.2     Clinical-ComBAT Data Formation Model
Clinical-ComBAT introduces several key modifications to the original ComBAT
framework, specifically designed to better address the requirements of clinical
practice. The reader shall refer to Figure 1 for a step-by-step illustration of
Clinical-ComBAT.
    Its primary objective is to enable reliable comparison of patient data against
a normative model, a cornerstone of clinical applications. A distinctive fea-
ture of Clinical-ComBAT lies in its strategy of harmonizing each site with a
designated reference site. Similar sitewise harmonization strategies have been
proposed in methods such as M-ComBAT [26] and Pairwise-ComBAT [28].
In this context, harmonization reduces to aligning the data from a moving
site, DM v = {(yM 1v , ⃗xM 1 ), . . . , (yM N v , ⃗xM N )}, with that of a reference site,
DRv = {(yR1v , ⃗xR1 ), . . . , (yRN v , ⃗xRN )}. Clinical-ComBAT assumes that the
reference site contains a sufficiently large and diverse healthy control (HC) pop-
ulation to establish a robust normative model. This assumption relies on the
diversity of the reference cohort, which should span a wide age range, include
both handedness profiles, and ensure a balanced representation of genders.
    The sitewise harmonization approach in Clinical-ComBAT addresses two
challenges. First, it avoids the complexity of needing to harmonize an ever-
growing number of sites simultaneously, as each site is harmonized indepen-
dently. Second, it resolves the problem with ComBAT, which could inadver-
tently modify the harmonization parameters for already calibrated sites when
applied indiscriminately to a new site.
    Additionally, sitewise harmonization simplifies the data formation equation
used in ComBAT (c.f. Eq. 1). At the core of most ComBAT methods is the
assumption that each dataset includes two additive biases (a population bias αv
and a site bias γiv ) and two multiplicative biases (a population bias σv and a
site bias δiv ). These four parameters are intended to represent the variations of
each site from an overall unbiased reference (yet normative) population. Since
Clinical-ComBAT independently harmonizes each moving site to a reference site,
the data formation model can be streamlined to two biases. To do so, Clinical-
ComBAT combines the αv + γiv additive biases of Eq. (1) into a single sitewise
additive bias, denoted as biv , where i ∈ {M, R} is the index for the moving (M)
and the reference (R) site. Additionally, because the multiplication of a normally
distributed variable ϵijv ∼ N (0, σv2 ) by δiv still results in a normal distribution
with variance (σv δiv )2 , our model adopts a single multiplicative bias, denoted
as div . Compared to Eq. (1), these modifications lead to a simplified sitewise



                                            5
Figure 1: Clinical-ComBAT harmonization process for aligning a moving site to
a reference site. a) Raw data distributions from the reference (black) and moving
(green) sites. b) data after Clinical-ComBAT harmonization. c) Step-by-step
illustration of the Clinical-ComBAT procedure. Scatter plots show the reference
(black) and moving (green) data. Step 1 consists of fitting a regression model
to both the reference and moving site data following Eq.(8) and (13). In Step
2, the site-specific covariate effects and intercept are removed from the moving
site data. Step 3 applies a variance correction to align the data dispersion with
that of the reference site. In Step 4, the adjusted data are transformed to match
the reference site distribution. Steps 2,3, and 4 derive from Eq.(18).


data formation model:
                           yijv = biv + ⃗xij β⃗v + div ϵ,                     (4)
where i ∈ {M, R} and ϵijv ∼ N (0, 1).
   Moreover, Clinical-ComBAT introduced nonlinearity in the model. This


                                         6
nonlinearity is achieved using a polynomial basis function of positive degree P ,
expressed as
                            φ(x⃗ij ) = (⃗xTij · ⃗xij + 1)P ,                 (5)
denoted as φ⃗ ij for notation simplicity. Notably, regardless of the degree P , the
expansion of this polynomial always includes a constant term, which allows the
additive bias biv to be effectively integrated into it. Consequently, the data
formation equation is revised to:
                                    ⃗ Tij β⃗iv + div ϵijv .
                             yijv = φ                                          (6)

Here, each site is characterized by a specific set of weights β ⃗iv , along with a
single multiplicative bias div and an additive bias that is incorporated into the
β⃗iv vector.

2.3    Harmonization Fit
With the sitewise harmonization framework of Clinical-ComBAT and according
to Eq. (6), the harmonization of a moving site M onto a target normative
reference R requires the estimation of four terms: two weight vectors β⃗M v and
β⃗Rv and two multiplicative biases dM v and dRv .

Reference site parameters β⃗Rv , d2Rv β   ⃗Rv is computed like ComBAT, by
maximizing a likelihood Gaussian distribution of the reference data. Doing so
boils down to minimizing the following L2 loss function [43, 44]
                                     JR
                    ⃗             1 X
                    βRv = arg max               ⃗ TRj β⃗Rv )2 ,
                                        (yRjv − φ                              (7)
                               ⃗ JR
                               β    j=1

that one can solve with a close form solution:
                            β⃗Rv = (ΦTR ΦR )−1 ΦTR YRv ,                       (8)
where ΦR is a matrix containing the concatenated covariate vectors φ   ⃗ Rj of all
reference participants, and YRv is a vector containing the values yRjv of the
reference site. While this formulation resembles the L/S ComBAT method [19],
Clinical-ComBAT relies solely on the reference site data, whereas L/S ComBAT
incorporates data from all sites.
    Similarly, with the hypothesis that the reference site is well populated, the
estimation of d2Rv does not require a Bayesian prior as in ComBAT [15]. Instead,
d2Rv can be estimated following a maximum likelihood, which is a simpler alter-
native to ComBAT’s iterative solution required by the use of an inverse gamma
prior (c.f. Supplementary Material S.2). Instead, d2Rv is obtained following a
maximum likelihood of a Gaussian distribution which leads to the calculation
of the simple variance of the rectified data [44], i.e.
                                      J
                                      R
                                   1 X
                         d2Rv =                ⃗ TRv β⃗Rv )2 .
                                        (y T − φ                               (9)
                                  JR j=1 jv


                                           7
Moving site parameters β⃗M v , d2M v Since the moving site may contain a
limited number of data, we proceed with the estimation of β⃗v and dM v with
a maximum a posteriori (MAP) formulation. Unlike ComBAT which models
β⃗M v with a likelihood distribution, Clinical-ComBAT models it with a posterior
distribution involving the product of a Gaussian likelihood and prior:
                      P (β⃗M v |DM v ) ∝ P (DM v |β⃗M v )P (β⃗M v )           (10)
where DM v = {YM v , XM } contains the list of all values and covariates of the
moving site at location v (e.g. voxel or region) and where

                         P (DM v |β⃗M v ) = N (ΦTM β⃗iv , Σl ),               (11)

                               P (β⃗M v ) = N (β⃗iv , Σ0 ).                   (12)
The goal of the prior is to make sure β⃗M v does not differ too much from β⃗Rv ,
the regression weights of the reference site. This is critically important when a
moving site accounts for a low number of participants. Maximizing the posterior
P (β⃗M v |DM v ) leads to the following close-form solution:

                 β⃗M v = (ΦTM ΦM + ⃗λT I)−1 (ΦTM Y
                                                 ⃗M v + ⃗λT β⃗Rv ),           (13)

where I is the identity matrix and ⃗λ ∈ Rp+ is an hyperparameter regularization
vector -please refer to section S3 of the Supp mat for the proof.
   Eq(13) comes with an intuitive flavor. For ⃗λ = ⃗0, the regression of β⃗M v is a
maximum likelihood estimation as in Eq. (8). As the regularization increases,
more weight is put on β⃗Rv , and, when ⃗λ is large enough, β⃗M v ≈ β
                                                                   ⃗Rv .
                                   2
   Clinical-ComBAT estimated dM v with a posterior given by
                      P (d2M v |zM v ) ≈ P (zM v |d2M v )P (d2M v ),          (14)
where zM v is the set of all rectified values of the moving site, namely zM v =
yM jv − φ
        ⃗Mjβ ⃗M v ∀j. Like ComBAT, the likelihood distribution follows a Gaus-
sian distribution. However, Clinical-ComBAT uses a prior Gamma distribution
(instead of an inverse Gamma for ComBAT) :
                          P (zM v |d2M v ) = N (0, d2M v )                    (15)
                          P (λM v ) = G(λM v , a0 , b0 ),                     (16)
where λM v = d21      is the inverse of the variance [45]. By incorporating the
                 Mv
variance of the reference site d2Rv in the Gamma prior, maximizing the posterior
leads to the following solution:

                                      JM dˆ2M v    νd2Rv
                            d2M v =             +        ,                    (17)
                                      JM + ν      JM + ν
where JM is the number of data in the moving site, dˆ2M v is the empirical variance
                                  PJM
of the rectified moving site: J1M j=1            ⃗ TM j β⃗M v )2 and ν ∈ R+ is a
                                        (yM jv − φ
hyperparameter -c.f. Section S.3 of the Supplementary Material for the proof.


                                            8
    This equation comes with a strikingly intuitive flavor. When the moving site
lacks data, indicated by JM = 0, the variance of the moving site d2M v defaults
to match the previously-estimated variance of the reference site d2Rv . As the
quantity of data of the moving site increases, d2M v transitions to a weighted
average between dˆ2M v and d2Rv . At some point, if JM = ν, d2M v becomes the
exact average between dˆ2M v and d2Rv . Beyond this point, when JM ≫ ν, d2M v
closely approximates to dˆ2M v . In addition to its simplicity, Eq. (17) does not
require an iterative process as in ComBAT and has the reference site variance
as a prior instead of data taken across other regions of the brain.
    Please note that the procedure for estimating the four(4) harmonization
parameters {d2M v , β⃗M v , d2Rv , β⃗Rv } is summarized in the Clinical-ComBAT-Fit
algorithm presented in section S.4 of the Supplementary Material.

2.4    Harmonization Process
Once the four parameters {d2M v , β⃗M v , d2Rv , β⃗Rv } have been estimated, the data
from the moving site can be harmonized with the reference site as follows:
                                 yM jv − β⃗M
                                           T
                                             vφ
                                              ⃗Mj 2
                  C−ComBAT
                ŷM jv     =            2        dRv + β⃗Rv
                                                         T
                                                             ⃗ TRj .
                                                            +φ                     (18)
                                       dM v
    Figure 1 depicts step-by-step the harmonization procedure of Clinical-ComBAT.
Together, these steps produce a harmonized dataset in which the moving site is
aligned with the reference site. The harmonization procedure is summarized in
the Clinical-ComBAT-Apply algorithm presented in section S.4 of the Supple-
mentary Material.

2.5    Goodness-of-Fit Quality Control
To assess harmonization quality, we compute a population overlap score, mea-
suring the degree of overlap between the data of the reference site DRv and that
of the harmonized moving dataset D̂M v . This is achieved by rectifying both
populations using the reference parameter vector β   ⃗Rv (c.f. Fig. 1 Step 2 for an
illustration of the rectification of the moving site):

               zRjv    = yRjv − φ⃗ TRj β⃗Rv               ⃗ TRj ) ∈ DRv ,
                                                 ∀(yRjv , φ                        (19)
              ẑM jv              ⃗ TM j β⃗Rv
                       = ŷM jv − φ                        ⃗ TM j ) ∈ DM v .
                                                ∀(ŷM jv , φ                       (20)
    This rectification process, by removing the effect of the covariates, allows
assuming that zijv is independent of the data vector φ    ⃗ ij and that P (zRjv |⃗
                                                                                 φRj ) =
                         ⃗
P (zRjv ) and P (ẑM jv |ϕM j ) = P (ẑM jv ) two Gaussian distributions following the
ComBAT assumption.
    The distance between univariate Gaussian distribution functions is computed
using the Bhattacharyya distance dB [28]:

                              1 (µR − µM )2  1   σ 2 + σM
                                                        2
                       dB =       2    2    + ln( R       ),                       (21)
                              4 σR + σ M     2    2σR σM

                                           9
where µR , µM are the mean and σR , σM the standard deviation of the rectified
reference and moving sites. The goodness-of-fit QC procedure is summarized in
the Harmonization-QC algorithm in section S.4 of the Supplementary Material.

2.6    Hyperparameter Auto-tuning
 Clinical-ComBAT introduces a hyperparameter vector ⃗λ in Eq.(13), which con-
 trols the degree to which the moving-site weights β⃗M v deviate from the reference-
 site weights β⃗Rv . At one extreme, when ⃗λ → ∞,  ⃗ the moving-site weights con-
 verge to those of the reference site (β⃗M v ≈ β⃗Rv ). At the other extreme, when
⃗λ → ⃗0, β⃗M v aligns closely with the moving-site data. An excessively large ⃗λ may
 result in underfitting, whereas an overly small ⃗λ can lead to overfitting, partic-
 ularly when the polynomial degree P in Eq.(5) is high, or when the moving
 dataset is small, includes outliers, or spans a narrow age range [28].
     The goal of the auto-tuning is to identify the appropriate ⃗λ vector that
 ensures the moving curve aligns closely with the reference curve while accurately
 representing the moving data. As illustrated in Figure 2, it uses four distance
 measures between the two curves. The first two measures, dmin and dmax
 represent the minimum and maximum distances between the curves across the
 age values present in the moving data:

                    dmin   =   | min β⃗Rv
                                       T
                                          ⃗ j − β⃗M
                                          φ       T
                                                     ⃗ j | ∀jxM ,
                                                    vφ                         (22)
                   dmax    =   | max β⃗ φ
                                       T
                                       Rv ⃗ j − β⃗ φ
                                                Mv
                                                  T
                                                     ⃗ j | ∀jxM .              (23)

Here, xM denotes the set of covariates at the moving site. The other two
distances, d1 and d2 , are the minimum and maximum inter-curve distances
across the full age range.
    The optimization of ⃗λ can be expressed as follows:

             ⃗λ = arg min sign(dmin 1 − d1 ) + sign(d2 − dmax τ ) + 2,         (24)
                       ⃗
                       λ            τ

where τ ≧ 1 is a predefined value, and the sign(x) function is defined as 1 if
x ≥ 0, -1 otherwise. Note that when τ = 1, the optimized ⃗λ vector results in a
moving curve perfectly parallel to the reference curve. A suitable ⃗λ vector can
be found by incrementally increasing its value until the conditions of Eq. (24)
are satisfied.
    The auto-tuning procedure is summarized in the Hyperparameter auto-tuning
is section S.4 of the Supplementary Material.

2.7    Data and Processing
Experiments comparing Clinical-ComBAT to ComBAT for DW-MRI-derived
metric harmonization were conducted on four datasets. The first one is the
Cambridge Centre for Ageing Neuroscience (CamCAN) dataset [32, 36], which
serves as the reference site. All reference subjects were acquired at the same


                                        10
Figure 2: Example of two model fits using a third-degree polynomial (P = 3).
Black dots and their fitted curve correspond to the reference Cam-CAN dataset,
while red dots represent 10 synthetic moving data points. Left: the moving
model with ⃗λ = 0 overfits the data and diverges outside the 60–80 age range.
Right: the auto-tuned model (⃗λ = 32762) does not deviate too much from the
reference model.


MRI machine (Siemens 3T TIM Trio MRI machine). The 441 HC, aged 18–87
years old, correspond to the subset of subjects acquired before the scanner up-
grade. The DW-MRI protocol includes 60 gradient directions evenly distributed
across two b-values (1000 and 2000 s/mm2 and three non-diffusion-weighted
measurements, with a 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 image resolution. The second datasets
are National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Intramural Healthy Volunteer
Dataset [46]. The NIMH dataset is composed of 119 HC, aged 18–71 years old.
The DW-MRI data were acquired at b = 1, 000s/mm2 for 48 uniformly dis-
tributed gradient directions (2 × 2 × 2 mm3 , General Electric 3T MRI machine).
The third and forth dataset are from the Track-TBI Network [47] (site A and
site B) with 55 HC and 104 Traumatic brain injury (TBI) patients, aged 19-68.
The DW-MRI protocol included 64 b = 1, 300s/mm2 , with the image resolution
set to 2.7 × 2.7 × 2.7 mm3 . Site A (University of Washington) was acquired on
the Philips 3T MRI machine, and Site B (University of Texas at Austin) was
acquired on a Siemens 3T MRI machine. The NIMH and Track-TBI dataset
were used as moving sites.
    The image processing was performed using the Tractoflow pipeline [48, 49,
50] for all subjects. T1-weighted images were registered to both the MNI tem-
plate [51] and to DW-MRI data using ANTs [52]. Diffusion Tensor Imag-
ing (DTI) maps (FA, MD) and the apparent fiber density map [39], derived
from the fiber Orientation Distribution Function (fODF) obtained from Con-
strained Spherical Deconvolution [40, 41], were registered to the MNI template
using the computed transformations. DW-MRI images with b-values below



                                      11
b = 1200s/mm2 were used to compute the Diffusion Tensors, and b-values above
b = 700s/mm2 were used to compute the fODFs. The fODFs were generated
using a spherical harmonics order of 8 and a standardized response function [40]
for all subjects (15, 4, 4) x 104 ms/µm2 . The IIT Atlas (v.5.0) [42] was aligned to
the MNI template [52], and mean MD, FA, and AFD values for each of the 42
bundles and the white matter skeleton mask were computed using the streamline
density map.
    The last dataset is called Modified-CamCAN [28]. It is a synthetic dataset
based on the 441 healthy controls from the original CamCAN cohort, with
altered mean diffusivity (MD) values. Controlled additive and multiplicative
biases were introduced according to:

                       yijv = A · biv + S · ⃗xij β⃗v + M · div ϵ               (25)

where A ∈ R is a shift in the mean, S ∈ R modulates covariate effects (slope),
and M ∈ R scales the residual variance [28].


3     Results
This section presents a series of four experiments. Unless otherwise mentioned,
through these experiments we used a prior ν of 5 for the estimation of the
moving site variance (c.f. Eq.17) a polynomial degree of P = 2 (c.f. Eq.(5)) and
a value of τ = 2 for the auto-tuning (c.f. Eq.24). All white matter bundles and
metrics were independently harmonized.

3.1    Harmonization Performances
Figure 3 compares the mean diffusivity (MD) harmonization using Clinical-
ComBAT (right), ComBAT (center), and non-harmonized data (left) with a
Bhattacharyya distance (DB ) value at the bottom left of each plot. The plots
of the top three rows illustrate data from moving sites (colored) overlaid on
the CamCAN reference site (black) distribution within the white matter skele-
ton mask. The misalignment of non-harmonized distributions with the refer-
ence highlights the necessity of harmonization. ComBAT improves alignment
but bias remains. The slope is not properly corrected for the NIMH site for
the age range 40 to 60 years old. The multiplicative bias is overcorrected for
the Track TBI site A, and undercorrected for Track TBI site B. In contrast,
Clinical-ComBAT provides a more accurate bias correction, yielding a distri-
bution closer to the reference site. The bottom row of Figure 3 quantifies this
improvement, showing DB histograms for 42 bundles before and after harmo-
nization. While both methods reduce DB , Clinical-ComBAT achieves lower
values, enhancing cross-site alignment in healthy controls. Similar trends are
observed for Fractional Anisotropy (FA) and Apparent Fiber Density (AFD),
shown in Supplementary Figures.




                                          12
Figure 3: Harmonization of mean diffusivity (MD) using Clinical-ComBAT and
ComBAT for the NIMH site (green), and Track-TBI site A (blue) and site B
(cyan). The top three rows show harmonized white matter skeleton masks with
corresponding DB values, where orange dots indicate TBI subjects. The bottom
row presents stacked histograms of DB across all white matter bundles and sites.
Lower DB values indicate closer alignment with the reference site, underscoring
both the necessity of harmonization and the superior performance of Clinical-
ComBAT over ComBAT.


3.2    Site-Specific Regression Parameters
A key advantage of Clinical-ComBAT is its use of site-specific regression pa-
rameters, enabling harmonization in scenarios where the single shared model


                                      13
across site of ComBAT fails. This is demonstrated in Figure 4, where the slope
of the moving data was artificially varied from 0 (no age effect) to 2 (ampli-
fied age effect). It presents the harmonization performance of ComBAT and
Clinical-ComBAT on synthetic mean diffusivity (MD) data. Figure 4a) shows
the distributions of target and moving site data before and after harmonization
for a modified slope in the moving site. ComBAT fails to adequately correct for
slope-induced bias, as shown by high Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), partic-
ularly when the slope diverges from the reference (S = 0). In contrast, Clinical-
ComBAT successfully aligns the moving site data to the reference across all
slope conditions. Figures 4b–4c illustrate harmonization under combined simu-
lated biases. While ComBAT improves cross-site alignment, Clinical-ComBAT
yields superior correction, particularly in Figure 4c, where the simulated data
include a slope bias. Figure 4d) summarizes RMSE across a range of slope
(S = [0, 2]) and multiplicative (M = [0.25, 1.75]) biases. Clinical-ComBAT
maintains RMSE below 9.4 × 10−7 across all conditions, while ComBAT pro-
vides its best performances only within S = [0.75, 1.25] and M = [0.75, 1.50],
with performance degrading under more pronounced biases.

3.3     Harmonization of Unseen Data
Clinical-ComBAT estimates harmonization parameters from the available data
(training) of a moving site and applies them to new, unseen subjects (test).
This situation is at the core of a day-to-day clinical practice, as new subjects
are scanned every day. To address the challenges of limited healthy control
data and potential extrapolation beyond the observed covariate range (e.g.,
age), Clinical-ComBAT incorporates priors from the reference site to regularize
both regression parameters and variance estimation.

3.3.1   Limited Number of Subjects
Figure 5 illustrates the harmonization performance of ComBAT and Clinical-
ComBAT on synthetic mean diffusivity (MD) data under limited number of
subjects. Figure 5a) shows the target site data (black) and the raw moving
site data (red) with simulated slope (S = 0.75), multiplicative (M = 1.50),
and additive (A = 0.90) biases. Figure 5b) reports RMSE as a function of the
number of randomly sampled training subjects selected from a pool of 341 (30
repetitions). The RMSE is computed over 100 unseen test subjects. The curves
indicate the mean, and shaded areas represent one standard deviation. By fit-
ting the moving data independently, Clinical-ComBAT manages to outperform
ComBAT. This is especially visible when the number of subject is superior to
twenty.
    Figure 6 illustrates the effect of sample size on harmonization performance
for ComBAT and Clinical-ComBAT on in-vivo data. In Figure 6a), the harmo-
nization of mean diffusivity (MD) of the arcuate fasciculus left bundle is shown
for 10, 20, and 30 training subjects (black dots) from the NIMH site, and the
green percentiles represent the corresponding test set. Clinical-ComBAT yields


                                       14
Figure 4: Synthetic mean diffusivity (MD) data harmonization performance
of ComBAT and Clinical-ComBAT. a–c) Distributions of target and moving
site data before and after harmonization under different simulated biases: a)
slope bias; b) combined multiplicative and additive biases; c) combined slope,
multiplicative, and additive biases. d) Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of
ComBAT and Clinical-ComBAT for increasing slope and multiplicative bias.


improved percentile alignment with the reference site, particularly in slope es-
timation. Figure 6b) presents the mean and standard deviation of the DB
across 42 bundles for both training and test sets. Clinical-ComBAT consis-
tently achieves lower DB on test data, indicating more robust harmonization
with a limited number of healthy controls.

3.3.2   Limited Age Range
In some cases, the training data may be limited to a narrow age range, with
unseen data falling outside that range. It is therefore critical to use a harmoniza-
tion model that generalizes well. Figure 7 shows the harmonization performance
of ComBAT and Clinical-ComBAT on synthetic MD data when training is re-
stricted to a limited age range. The test set includes 100 randomly selected
subjects and the remaining 341 subjects are use for generation training sets.
Figure 7a) displays the target site data (black) and raw moving site data (red)


                                        15
Figure 5: Harmonization performance of ComBAT and Clinical-ComBAT on
synthetic mean diffusivity (MD) data of the white matter skeleton mask, with
limited amount of training data. The test set comprises 100 randomly selected
subjects, and the remaining 341 subjects are used to generate training sets. a)
Target site data (black) and raw moving site data (red) under simulated biases:
slope S = 0.50, multiplicative M = 1.25, and additive A = 1.10. b) Root Mean
Squared Error (RMSE) across increasing numbers of randomly sampled training
subjects. Each condition was repeated 30 times. The curves show mean RMSE
and shaded areas represent one standard deviation.


of the white matter skeleton mask under simulated biases (S = 1, M = 1.50,
A = 0.90). Figure 7b) reports RMSE across training sets restricted to a ±10-
year age window, plotted as a function of the window center. The lines show
the mean across all 42 bundles, and the shaded area represent one standard
deviation. Clinical-ComBAT results are shown for τ = 1.75. Clinical-ComBAT
uses the reference slope as a prior to provide a more reliable model outside the
training age window, outperforming ComBAT.

3.4     Effect of the Bayesian Priors
3.4.1   Variance prior
Figure 8 illustrates the effect of Clinical-ComBAT’s variance prior (ν) on mean
diffusivity (MD) in the right corticospinal tract (CST) bundle using a limited
number of HCs. We selected ten randomly sampled HCs from the Track-TBI
dataset (site B) and tested different values of the variance prior parameter (see
Eq. 17). This parameter controls the weight of the prior on the variance es-
timation of the moving site (d2M v ). ComBAT (Figure 8b) estimates variance
using empirical Bayes, requiring simultaneous harmonization of all regions or
voxels. In contrast, Clinical-ComBAT leverages the well-populated reference
site to estimate the variance while accounting for the number of available sub-


                                       16
Figure 6: Impact of the number of samples on Harmonization (MD). (a) The
ComBAT and Clinical-ComBAT harmonized moving site (NIMH, arcuate fas-
ciculus left bundle) data using 10, 20 and 30 samples (black dots). The test
data (89 subjects, green percentiles) were harmonized using the model trained
on a subset of independent samples. The DB are reported for the test data.
(b) Bhattacharyya distances across all bundles (42) for training samples ranging
from 5 to 30. The color dotted lines show the DB when harmonizing with all
data (119 subjects) for ComBAT (orange) and Clinical-ComBAT (cyan).


jects in the moving site, thereby enabling independent harmonization of regions
or voxels. Furthermore, it supports single-region harmonization without com-
promising performance.
    In Figure 8c, setting ν = 0 underestimates d2M v , leading to an insufficient
correction of the multiplicative bias, as indicated by the wider percentile lines
compared to the reference site. With ν = 5 and ν = 10 (Figures 8d and 8e),
Clinical-ComBAT aligns d2M v with d2Rv . However, at ν = 100 (Figure 8f) d2M v is
overestimated due to excessive reliance on the reference prior. A high ν with few
moving site subjects effectively fixes d2M v to d2Rv , preventing proper correction
of the multiplicative bias.

3.4.2   Covariate Prior
Figure 9 illustrates the importance of the Clinical-ComBAT hyperparameter
auto-tuning when dealing with a moving site whose HC subjects spans a limited
age range (21-63 years old). It shows the effects of various λ values with a fixed
ν = 5 using polynomial models of order P = 1 to P = 4. Although a fixed λ = 10
shows a good model fit (green line) within the moving site’s age range, the model
quickly diverges as the age deviates from the input data. A polynomial degree of
P = 2 or P = 3 with auto-tuning τ = 2 provides a good balance, closely fitting
the available data while yielding reasonable extrapolations. Higher polynomial
degrees (P = 3 and P = 4) require auto-tuning for usability beyond the input


                                        17
Figure 7: Harmonization performance of ComBAT and Clinical-ComBAT on
synthetic mean diffusivity (MD) data of the with limited age range training
data. The test set comprises 100 randomly selected subjects, and the remaining
341 subjects are used to generate training sets. a) Target site data (black) and
raw moving site data (red) of the white matter skeleton mask under simulated
biases: slope S = 1, multiplicative M = 1.50, and additive A = 0.90. b) Root
Mean Squared Error (RMSE) when training subjects are restricted to a ±10-year
age window. The plot show the mean RMSE for each window (center) across
the 42 bundles. The shaded area represent one standard deviation. Clinical-
ComBAT results are shown for τ = 1, 75.


data range. While higher τ values improve extrapolation, they reduce fit quality
within the data range due to the stronger prior. Overall, data models estimated
with τ = 2 and τ = 1.25 are suitable for the harmonization of moving site
subjects of all ages.


4    Discussion
Clinical-ComBAT improves harmonization performance across a range of bias
scenarios and data limitations compared to ComBAT [15]. In ComBAT, the
regression parameter βv in is identical across all sites. Clinical-ComBAT in-
troduces a subtle but crucial modification by adding a site index i, resulting
in βiv . This adjustment allows each site to have its own regression parameter,
which is essential for addressing site-specific variations. This site-specific re-
gression parameters allow Clinical-ComBAT to correct slope-related biases that
ComBAT fails to address (Figs. 3 and 4). Moreover, Clinical-ComBAT shows
superior generalization to unseen data, outperforming ComBAT with limited
sample sizes (Figs. 5 and 6) and restricted age ranges scenarios (Fig. 7), com-
mon in clinical datasets. This robustness is enabled by the integration of priors
from the reference site, which stabilize parameter estimation in challenging set-


                                       18
Figure 8: Harmonization with Clinical-ComBAT of a limited number of ten
healthy control subjects from the Track TBI dataset (site B) on the mean dif-
fusivity (MD) of the right Corticospinal Tract (CST) bundle. (a) show the
non-harmonized data, with ten randomly selected HC used for harmonization
highlighted with the green circle markers. The harmonization with ComBAT
is shown in (b). (c-f) show the harmonization with Clinical-ComBAT using in-
creasing ν values (c.f Eq. 17). With ν = 0, the standard deviation of the moving
site is overestimated and overcorrected. With ν = 5 and ν = 10, results show
the standard deviation of the moving site aligned with the standard deviation
of the reference site. (f) shows an underestimation of the standard deviation
due to an excessively strong a priori (ν = 100).




                                      19
Figure 9: Clinical-ComBAT model fit for the mean diffusivity (MD) of the white
matter skeleton mask of Track TBI site A, using reference site a priori with and
without automatic hyperparameter tuning with polynomial order P=1 to 4.
The first row shows the fitted model using a fixed λ = 10. The second and third
rows show the fitted model using automatic hyperparameter tuning (τ = 2, and
τ = 1.25, respectively)


tings. Furthermore, the adaptive regularization of variance (ν) and regression
coefficients (τ ) provides a flexible framework that supports accurate extrapola-
tion (Figs. 8 and 9). Together, these features position Clinical-ComBAT as a
reliable harmonization approach for normative modeling applications in hetero-
geneous multi-site clinical cohorts. Moreover, the improved alignment provided
by Clinical-ComBAT may facilitate the delineation of pathological subjects from
the reference population.
    In this study, we used the Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience
(CamCAN) dataset [32, 36] as the reference site to demonstrate the potential
of Clinical-ComBAT. This dataset was chosen primarily for its large sample of
healthy controls spanning a wide age range (18–87 years). In future work, other
datasets, particularly those providing richer DW-MRI acquisitions, could be
used to enable harmonization of additional diffusion metrics. More broadly, the
DW-MRI community may eventually converge on a standard reference dataset,


                                       20
facilitating direct comparability of reported values across studies, thereby im-
proving reproducibility and reducing site-related biases.

4.1    Limitations and Recommendations
Clinical-ComBAT leverages prior information from a well-characterized refer-
ence site to stabilize parameter estimation when moving site data are sparse
or incomplete. Low values of the hyperparameter τ constrain the regression
coefficients to those of the reference site, effectively fixing the model shape and
estimating only the intercept. Similarly, high values of ν fix the moving site
variance to that of the reference site. While these priors enable extrapolation
and prevent overfitting, they may introduce bias if the true distribution of the
moving site differs substantially in variance or covariate effects. Nonetheless, we
believe extrapolating from the reference site is preferable to relying on poorly
estimated parameters, especially in underpowered scenarios. The harmoniza-
tion model should be retrained as additional moving site data become available,
allowing for refinement of site-specific parameters and improved accuracy.
    In practice, we recommend selecting the polynomial degree for modeling
based on the reference site, choosing the minimal order that ensures a good fit
(e.g., based on Bhattacharyya distance). For mean diffusivity (MD), fractional
anisotropy (FA), and apparent fiber density (AFD), a second-order polynomial
(P = 2) is typically sufficient. Regarding variance estimation, our results sug-
gest setting ν = 5, which allows d2M v to be primarily data-driven when sufficient
observations are present, while gradually incorporating the reference prior in
low-data scenarios. For the regression prior, a value of τ = 2 offers a robust
balance between model flexibility and extrapolation. Lower τ values risk over-
constraining the model, while higher values may produce unstable predictions.


5     Conclusion
This study introduces Clinical-ComBAT, an adaptation of the widely used Com-
BAT method designed to address key limitations in diffusion MRI harmonization
for clinical applications. As summarized in Table 1, Clinical-ComBAT has nine
key differences with the original ComBat method.
    While ComBAT effectively reduces site-related biases, its assumptions, such
as linear covariate relationships, large sample requirements, and fixed site num-
bers, limit its applicability in real-world clinical settings. Clinical-ComBAT
overcomes these constraints by incorporating a polynomial data model and a
new mathematical formulation for estimating the harmonization parameters
taylored to site-specific harmonization to a normative reference, and a vari-
ance prior tailored for small sample sizes. Unlike ComBAT, which harmonizes
all bundles (or voxels, or regions) simultaneously, Clinical-ComBAT processes
each independently. This independence allows for increasing the number of
bundles without altering harmonization parameters for existing ones, and en-
ables single-bundle harmonization without degrading performance. Our results


                                        21
 Table 1: The nine (9) differences between Clinical-ComBAT and ComBAT.

                    Clinical-ComBAT                             ComBAT
 Type of har-       Pairwise harmonization between a mov-       Group harmonization between a set of
 monization         ing site and a well-populated reference     two or more sites
                    site
 Data forma-        New data formation model, Eq. (6), with     Data formation model of Eq. (1) with two
 tion model         one additive and one multiplicative bias    additive and two multiplicative biases
 Model param-       Model parameter vector β ⃗iv is site spe-   Model parameter vector β   ⃗v is shared
 eters              cific                                       across all sites
 Model type         Non-linear model, Eq. (5)                   Linear model, Eq. (2)
 Variance      of   Variance d2Rv computed via maximum          Variance of each site computed via max-
 reference site     likelihood, Eq. (9)                         imum a posteriori with inverse-Gamma
                                                                prior, Eq. (S.18)
 Parameter es-      Moving site parameters β ⃗M v computed      Parameters β  ⃗v computed via ordinary
 timation           via MAP using moving-site data and a        maximum likelihood pooling data from
                                                       ⃗Rv
                    prior on reference-site parameters β        all sites (Eq. (S.1))
                    (Eq. (13))
 Variance    of     Variance d2M v computed via MAP us-         Variance of each site computed via max-
 moving site        ing a Gamma prior conditioned on d2Rv       imum a posteriori with inverse-Gamma
                    (Eq. (17))                                  prior, Eq. (S.18)
  Quality
                    Includes a QC module evaluating good-       No quality control module
  control
                    ness of fit between target and harmonized
                    moving site (Algo. 3)
 Hyperpara-         Some hyperparameters (e.g., ⃗λ and ν0 )     No hyperparameter auto-tuning
 meter tuning       automatically estimated via auto-tuning
                    algorithm (Algo. 4)



demonstrate that Clinical-ComBAT improves harmonization quality, particu-
larly in datasets with limited healthy controls, reducing residual biases and
better aligning diffusion metrics with the reference distribution. These findings
highlight the method’s potential to enhance cross-site comparability in clinical
studies, ultimately improving the detection and interpretation of disease-related
abnormalities.


Data and Code Availability
All MRI dataset used in this work are publicly available. The source code and
documentation of the Clinical-ComBAT method is available at github.com/
scil-vital/clinical-ComBAT/.


Author Contributions
GG contributed to conceptualization, methodology, software development, and
writing of the original draft. ME contributed to methodology, software devel-
opment, and visualization. FD contributed to conceptualization, methodology,
and software development. MD and GT contributed to data curation. YD
contributed to software development. JCH contributed to supervision. AB


                                             22
contributed to software development and data curation. MD contributed to
conceptualization, supervision, and funding acquisition. PMJ contributed to
conceptualization, methodology, writing of the original draft, supervision, and
funding acquisition.


Acknowledgement
This research was partially funded by the Consortium québécois sur la découverte
du médicament (CQDM) and the Canadian NSERC discovery grants RGPIN-
2023-04584 and RGPIN-2020-04818. This research was also enabled by support
provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada.


Declaration of Competing Interests
Matthieu Dumont, Guillaume Theaud, Jean-Christophe Houde, Maxime De-
scoteaux and Pierre-Marc Jodoin report membership and employment with
Imeka Solutions inc.
   Gabriel Girard, Manon Edde, Félix Dumais, Matthieu Dumont, Guillaume
Theaud, Yoan David, Jean-Christophe Houde, Maxime Descoteaux and Pierre-
Marc Jodoin have a patent pending for the Clinical-ComBAT method: (2024)
Harmonization of diffusion MRI, USPTO Serial No.63/709,998.


References
 [1] M. Di Biase, Y. Tian, R. Bethlehem, J. Seidlitz, A. Alexander-Bloch,
     B. Yeo, and A. Zalesky, “Mapping human brain charts cross-sectionally and
     longitudinally,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 120,
     5 2023.
 [2] A. F. Marquand, I. Rezek, J. Buitelaar, and C. F. Beckmann, “Under-
     standing heterogeneity in clinical cohorts using normative models: Beyond
     case-control studies,” Biological Psychiatry, vol. 80, pp. 552–561, 10 2016.
 [3] S. Rutherford, P. Barkema, I. F. Tso, C. Sripada, C. F. Beckmann, H. G.
     Ruhe, and A. F. Marquand, “Evidence for embracing normative modeling,”
     eLife, vol. 12, 3 2023.
 [4] S. Verdi, A. F. Marquand, J. M. Schott, and J. H. Cole, “Beyond the
     average patient: how neuroimaging models can address heterogeneity in
     dementia,” Brain, vol. 144, pp. 2946–2953, 11 2021.

 [5] J. E. Villalón-Reina, C. A. Moreau, T. M. Nir, N. Jahanshad, A. Maillard,
     D. Romascano, B. Draganski, S. Lippé, C. E. Bearden, S. M. Kia, A. F.
     Marquand, S. Jacquemont, and P. M. Thompson, “Multi-site normative
     modeling of diffusion tensor imaging metrics using hierarchical bayesian


                                        23
    regression,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Interven-
    tion (MICCAI), pp. 207–217, 2022.
 [6] J. T. Leek, R. B. Scharpf, H. C. Bravo, D. Simcha, B. Langmead, W. E.
     Johnson, D. Geman, K. Baggerly, and R. A. Irizarry, “Tackling the
     widespread and critical impact of batch effects in high-throughput data,”
     Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 11, pp. 733–739, 10 2010.
 [7] M. S. Pinto, R. Paolella, T. Billiet, P. V. Dyck, P.-J. Guns, B. Jeurissen,
     A. Ribbens, A. J. den Dekker, and J. Sijbers, “Harmonization of brain
     diffusion mri: Concepts and methods,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 14,
     5 2020.

 [8] S. Cetin-Karayumak, F. Zhang, R. Zurrin, T. Billah, L. Zekelman,
     N. Makris, S. Pieper, L. J. O’Donnell, and Y. Rathi, “Harmonized diffusion
     mri data and white matter measures from the adolescent brain cognitive
     development study,” Scientific Data, vol. 11, p. 249, 2 2024.
 [9] F. Hu, A. A. Chen, H. Horng, V. Bashyam, C. Davatzikos, A. Alexander-
     Bloch, M. Li, H. Shou, T. D. Satterthwaite, M. Yu, and R. T. Shinohara,
     “Image harmonization: A review of statistical and deep learning methods
     for removing batch effects and evaluation metrics for effective harmoniza-
     tion,” NeuroImage, vol. 274, p. 120125, 7 2023.
[10] K. M. Huynh, G. Chen, Y. Wu, D. Shen, and P.-T. Yap, “Multi-site harmo-
     nization of diffusion mri data via method of moments,” IEEE Transactions
     on Medical Imaging, vol. 38, pp. 1599–1609, 7 2019.
[11] D. Moyer, G. V. Steeg, C. M. W. Tax, and P. M. Thompson, “Scanner
     invariant representations for diffusion mri harmonization,” Magnetic Res-
     onance in Medicine, vol. 84, pp. 2174–2189, 10 2020.

[12] K. G. Schilling, C. M. Tax, F. Rheault, C. Hansen, Q. Yang, F.-C. Yeh,
     L. Cai, A. W. Anderson, and B. A. Landman, “Fiber tractography bun-
     dle segmentation depends on scanner effects, vendor effects, acquisition
     resolution, diffusion sampling scheme, diffusion sensitization, and bundle
     segmentation workflow,” NeuroImage, vol. 242, p. 118451, 11 2021.

[13] A. A. Chen, J. C. Beer, N. J. Tustison, P. A. Cook, R. T. Shinohara,
     and H. Shou, “Mitigating site effects in covariance for machine learning
     in neuroimaging data,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 43, pp. 1179–1195, 3
     2022.
[14] A. D. Luca, S. C. Karayumak, A. Leemans, Y. Rathi, S. Swinnen, J. Gooi-
     jers, A. Clauwaert, R. Bahr, S. B. Sandmo, N. Sochen, D. Kaufmann,
     M. Muehlmann, G.-J. Biessels, I. Koerte, and O. Pasternak, “Cross-site
     harmonization of multi-shell diffusion mri measures based on rotational in-
     variant spherical harmonics (rish),” NeuroImage, vol. 259, p. 119439, 10
     2022.


                                      24
[15] J.-P. Fortin, D. Parker, B. Tunç, T. Watanabe, M. A. Elliott, K. Ruparel,
     D. R. Roalf, T. D. Satterthwaite, R. C. Gur, R. E. Gur, R. T. Schultz,
     R. Verma, and R. T. Shinohara, “Harmonization of multi-site diffusion
     tensor imaging data,” NeuroImage, vol. 161, pp. 149–170, 11 2017.
[16] H. Horng, A. Singh, B. Yousefi, E. A. Cohen, B. Haghighi, S. Katz, P. B.
     Noël, R. T. Shinohara, and D. Kontos, “Generalized combat harmonization
     methods for radiomic features with multi-modal distributions and multiple
     batch effects,” Scientific Reports, vol. 12, p. 4493, 3 2022.
[17] F. Hu, A. Lucas, A. A. Chen, K. Coleman, H. Horng, R. W. Ng, N. J. Tusti-
     son, K. A. Davis, H. Shou, M. Li, R. T. Shinohara, and T. A. D. N. Ini-
     tiative, “Deepcombat: A statistically motivated, hyperparameter-robust,
     deep learning approach to harmonization of neuroimaging data,” bioRxiv,
     p. 2023.04.24.537396, 4 2023.
[18] H. Mirzaalian, L. Ning, P. Savadjiev, O. Pasternak, S. Bouix,
     O. Michailovich, G. Grant, C. Marx, R. Morey, L. Flashman, M. George,
     T. McAllister, N. Andaluz, L. Shutter, R. Coimbra, R. Zafonte, M. Cole-
     man, M. Kubicki, C. Westin, M. Stein, M. Shenton, and Y. Rathi, “Inter-
     site and inter-scanner diffusion mri data harmonization,” NeuroImage,
     vol. 135, pp. 311–323, 7 2016.
[19] W. E. Johnson, C. Li, and A. Rabinovic, “Adjusting batch effects in mi-
     croarray expression data using empirical bayes methods,” Biostatistics,
     vol. 8, pp. 118–127, 1 2007.
[20] S. C. Karayumak, S. Bouix, L. Ning, A. James, T. Crow, M. Shenton,
     M. Kubicki, and Y. Rathi, “Retrospective harmonization of multi-site diffu-
     sion mri data acquired with different acquisition parameters,” NeuroImage,
     vol. 184, pp. 180–200, 1 2019.
[21] S. Cetin-Karayumak, M. A. D. Biase, N. Chunga, B. Reid, N. Somes,
     A. E. Lyall, S. Kelly, B. Solgun, O. Pasternak, M. Vangel, G. Pearlson,
     C. Tamminga, J. A. Sweeney, B. Clementz, D. Schretlen, P. V. Viher,
     K. Stegmayer, S. Walther, J. Lee, T. Crow, A. James, A. Voineskos, R. W.
     Buchanan, P. R. Szeszko, A. K. Malhotra, R. Hegde, R. McCarley, M. Ke-
     shavan, M. Shenton, Y. Rathi, and M. Kubicki, “White matter abnormal-
     ities across the lifespan of schizophrenia: a harmonized multi-site diffusion
     mri study,” Molecular Psychiatry, vol. 25, pp. 3208–3219, 12 2020.
[22] A. H. Zhu, T. M. Nir, S. Javid, J. E. Villalon-Reina, A. L. Rodrigue, L. T.
     Strike, G. I. de Zubicaray, K. L. McMahon, M. J. Wright, S. E. Medland,
     J. Blangero, D. C. Glahn, P. Kochunov, A. K. Håberg, P. M. Thomp-
     son, N. Jahanshad, and A. D. N. Initiative, “Lifespan reference curves for
     harmonizing multi-site regional brain white matter metrics from diffusion
     mri,” bioRxiv : the preprint server for biology, 3 2024.



                                       25
[23] J.-P. Fortin, N. Cullen, Y. I. Sheline, W. D. Taylor, I. Aselcioglu, P. A.
     Cook, P. Adams, C. Cooper, M. Fava, P. J. McGrath, M. McInnis, M. L.
     Phillips, M. H. Trivedi, M. M. Weissman, and R. T. Shinohara, “Har-
     monization of cortical thickness measurements across scanners and sites,”
     NeuroImage, vol. 167, pp. 104–120, 2 2018.
[24] J. Radua, E. Vieta, R. Shinohara, P. Kochunov, Y. Quidé, M. J. Green,
     C. S. Weickert, T. Weickert, J. Bruggemann, T. Kircher, I. Nenadić, M. J.
     Cairns, M. Seal, U. Schall, F. Henskens, J. M. Fullerton, B. Mowry, C. Pan-
     telis, R. Lenroot, V. Cropley, C. Loughland, R. Scott, D. Wolf, T. D. Sat-
     terthwaite, Y. Tan, K. Sim, F. Piras, G. Spalletta, N. Banaj, E. Pomarol-
     Clotet, A. Solanes, A. Albajes-Eizagirre, E. J. Canales-Rodrı́guez, S. Sarro,
     A. D. Giorgio, A. Bertolino, M. Stäblein, V. Oertel, C. Knöchel, S. Borg-
     wardt, S. du Plessis, J.-Y. Yun, J. S. Kwon, U. Dannlowski, T. Hahn,
     D. Grotegerd, C. Alloza, C. Arango, J. Janssen, C. Dı́az-Caneja, W. Jiang,
     V. Calhoun, S. Ehrlich, K. Yang, N. G. Cascella, Y. Takayanagi, A. Sawa,
     A. Tomyshev, I. Lebedeva, V. Kaleda, M. Kirschner, C. Hoschl, D. Tome-
     cek, A. Skoch, T. van Amelsvoort, G. Bakker, A. James, A. Preda, A. Wei-
     deman, D. J. Stein, F. Howells, A. Uhlmann, H. Temmingh, C. López-
     Jaramillo, A. Dı́az-Zuluaga, L. Fortea, E. Martinez-Heras, E. Solana,
     S. Llufriu, N. Jahanshad, P. Thompson, J. Turner, T. van Erp, D. Glahn,
     G. Pearlson, E. Hong, A. Krug, V. Carr, P. Tooney, G. Cooper, P. Rasser,
     P. Michie, S. Catts, R. Gur, R. Gur, F. Yang, F. Fan, J. Chen, H. Guo,
     S. Tan, Z. Wang, H. Xiang, F. Piras, F. Assogna, R. Salvador, P. McKenna,
     A. Bonvino, M. King, S. Kaiser, D. Nguyen, and J. Pineda-Zapata, “In-
     creased power by harmonizing structural mri site differences with the com-
     bat batch adjustment method in enigma,” NeuroImage, vol. 218, p. 116956,
     9 2020.
[25] R. Pomponio, G. Erus, M. Habes, J. Doshi, D. Srinivasan, E. Mamourian,
     V. Bashyam, I. M. Nasrallah, T. D. Satterthwaite, Y. Fan, L. J. Launer,
     C. L. Masters, P. Maruff, C. Zhuo, H. Völzke, S. C. Johnson, J. Fripp,
     N. Koutsouleris, D. H. Wolf, R. Gur, R. Gur, J. Morris, M. S. Albert, H. J.
     Grabe, S. M. Resnick, R. N. Bryan, D. A. Wolk, R. T. Shinohara, H. Shou,
     and C. Davatzikos, “Harmonization of large mri datasets for the analysis
     of brain imaging patterns throughout the lifespan,” NeuroImage, vol. 208,
     p. 116450, 3 2020.
[26] R. Da-ano, I. Masson, F. Lucia, M. Doré, P. Robin, J. Alfieri, C. Rousseau,
     A. Mervoyer, C. Reinhold, J. Castelli, R. D. Crevoisier, J. F. Rameé,
     O. Pradier, U. Schick, D. Visvikis, and M. Hatt, “Performance comparison
     of modified combat for harmonization of radiomic features for multicenter
     studies,” Scientific Reports, vol. 10, p. 10248, 6 2020.
[27] J. C. Beer, N. J. Tustison, P. A. Cook, C. Davatzikos, Y. I. Sheline, R. T.
     Shinohara, and K. A. Linn, “Longitudinal combat: A method for har-
     monizing longitudinal multi-scanner imaging data,” NeuroImage, vol. 220,
     p. 117129, 10 2020.


                                       26
[28] P.-M. Jodoin, M. Edde, G. Girard, F. Dumais, G. Theaud, M. Dumont,
     J.-C. Houde, Y. David, and M. Descoteaux, “Combat harmonization: Chal-
     lenges and best practices,” submitted, 2025.
[29] N. W. Chew, G. K. Lee, B. Y. Tan, M. Jing, Y. Goh, N. J. Ngiam, L. L. Yeo,
     A. Ahmad, F. A. Khan, G. N. Shanmugam, A. K. Sharma, R. Komalkumar,
     P. Meenakshi, K. Shah, B. Patel, B. P. Chan, S. Sunny, B. Chandra, J. J.
     Ong, P. R. Paliwal, L. Y. Wong, R. Sagayanathan, J. T. Chen, A. Y. Y.
     Ng, H. L. Teoh, G. Tsivgoulis, C. S. Ho, R. C. Ho, and V. K. Sharma,
     “A multinational, multicentre study on the psychological outcomes and
     associated physical symptoms amongst healthcare workers during covid-19
     outbreak,” Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, vol. 88, pp. 559–565, 8 2020.
[30] P. S. Aisen, R. C. Petersen, M. C. Donohue, A. Gamst, R. Raman, R. G.
     Thomas, S. Walter, J. Q. Trojanowski, L. M. Shaw, L. A. Beckett, C. R.
     Jack, W. Jagust, A. W. Toga, A. J. Saykin, J. C. Morris, R. C. Green,
     and M. W. Weiner, “Clinical core of the alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging
     initiative: Progress and plans,” Alzheimer’s {&} Dementia, vol. 6, pp. 239–
     246, 5 2010.
[31] J. K. Yue, M. J. Vassar, H. F. Lingsma, S. R. Cooper, D. O. Okonkwo,
     A. B. Valadka, W. A. Gordon, A. I. R. Maas, P. Mukherjee, E. L. Yuh,
     A. M. Puccio, D. M. Schnyer, G. T. Manley, T.-T. Investigators, S. S.
     Casey, M. Cheong, K. Dams-O’Connor, A. J. Hricik, E. E. Knight, E. S.
     Kulubya, D. K. Menon, D. J. Morabito, J. L. Pacheco, and T. K. Sinha,
     “Transforming research and clinical knowledge in traumatic brain injury
     pilot: Multicenter implementation of the common data elements for trau-
     matic brain injury,” Journal of Neurotrauma, vol. 30, pp. 1831–1844, 11
     2013.
[32] M. A. Shafto, L. K. Tyler, M. Dixon, J. R. Taylor, J. B. Rowe, R. Cu-
     sack, A. J. Calder, W. D. Marslen-Wilson, J. Duncan, T. Dalgleish, R. N.
     Henson, C. Brayne, and F. E. Matthews, “The cambridge centre for age-
     ing and neuroscience (cam-can) study protocol: a cross-sectional, lifespan,
     multidisciplinary examination of healthy cognitive ageing,” BMC Neurol-
     ogy, vol. 14, p. 204, 12 2014.
[33] B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, K. Farahani,
     J. Kirby, Y. Burren, N. Porz, J. Slotboom, R. Wiest, L. Lanczi, E. Gerstner,
     M.-A. Weber, T. Arbel, B. B. Avants, N. Ayache, P. Buendia, D. L. Collins,
     N. Cordier, J. J. Corso, A. Criminisi, T. Das, H. Delingette, C. Demi-
     ralp, C. R. Durst, M. Dojat, S. Doyle, J. Festa, F. Forbes, E. Geremia,
     B. Glocker, P. Golland, X. Guo, A. Hamamci, K. M. Iftekharuddin, R. Jena,
     N. M. John, E. Konukoglu, D. Lashkari, J. A. Mariz, R. Meier, S. Pereira,
     D. Precup, S. J. Price, T. R. Raviv, S. M. S. Reza, M. Ryan, D. Sarikaya,
     L. Schwartz, H.-C. Shin, J. Shotton, C. A. Silva, N. Sousa, N. K. Subbanna,
     G. Szekely, T. J. Taylor, O. M. Thomas, N. J. Tustison, G. Unal, F. Vasseur,
     M. Wintermark, D. H. Ye, L. Zhao, B. Zhao, D. Zikic, M. Prastawa,


                                       27
    M. Reyes, and K. V. Leemput, “The multimodal brain tumor image seg-
    mentation benchmark (brats),” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging,
    vol. 34, pp. 1993–2024, 10 2015.
[34] C. Sudlow, J. Gallacher, N. Allen, V. Beral, P. Burton, J. Danesh,
     P. Downey, P. Elliott, J. Green, M. Landray, B. Liu, P. Matthews, G. Ong,
     J. Pell, A. Silman, A. Young, T. Sprosen, T. Peakman, and R. Collins,
     “Uk biobank: An open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide
     range of complex diseases of middle and old age,” PLOS Medicine, vol. 12,
     p. e1001779, 3 2015.
[35] S. Bakas, H. Akbari, A. Sotiras, M. Bilello, M. Rozycki, J. S. Kirby, J. B.
     Freymann, K. Farahani, and C. Davatzikos, “Advancing the cancer genome
     atlas glioma mri collections with expert segmentation labels and radiomic
     features,” Scientific Data, vol. 4, p. 170117, 9 2017.
[36] J. R. Taylor, N. Williams, R. Cusack, T. Auer, M. A. Shafto, M. Dixon,
     L. K. Tyler, Cam-CAN, and R. N. Henson, “The cambridge centre for age-
     ing and neuroscience (cam-can) data repository: Structural and functional
     mri, meg, and cognitive data from a cross-sectional adult lifespan sample,”
     NeuroImage, vol. 144, pp. 262–269, 1 2017.
[37] T. L. Jernigan, S. A. Brown, and G. J. Dowling, “The adolescent brain
     cognitive development study,” Journal of Research on Adolescence, vol. 28,
     pp. 154–156, 3 2018.
[38] A. C. Nugent, A. G. Thomas, M. Mahoney, A. Gibbons, J. Smith,
     A. Charles, J. S. Shaw, J. D. Stout, A. M. Namyst, A. Basavaraj, E. Earl,
     D. Moraczewski, E. Guinee, M. Liu, T. Riddle, J. Snow, S. Japee, M. An-
     drews, A. Pavletic, S. Sinclair, V. Roopchansingh, P. A. Bandettini, and
     J. Chung, “”the nimh healthy research volunteer dataset”,” 2024.
[39] D. Raffelt, J. D. Tournier, S. Rose, G. R. Ridgway, R. Henderson,
     S. Crozier, O. Salvado, and A. Connelly, “Apparent fibre density: A novel
     measure for the analysis of diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance images,”
     NeuroImage, vol. 59, pp. 3976–3994, 2012.

[40] M. Descoteaux, E. Angelino, S. Fitzgibbons, and R. Deriche, “Regular-
     ized, fast, and robust analytical q-ball imaging.,” Magnetic resonance
     in medicine : official journal of the Society of Magnetic Resonance in
     Medicine / Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 58, pp. 497–
     510, 9 2007.

[41] J.-D. Tournier, F. Calamante, and A. Connelly, “Robust determination
     of the fibre orientation distribution in diffusion mri: non-negativity con-
     strained super-resolved spherical deconvolution.,” NeuroImage, vol. 35,
     pp. 1459–1472, 5 2007.



                                      28
[42] X. Qi and K. Arfanakis, “Regionconnect: Rapidly extracting standardized
     brain connectivity information in voxel-wise neuroimaging studies,” Neu-
     roImage, vol. 225, p. 117462, 1 2021.
[43] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, vol. 16. Springer,
     2006.

[44] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern Classification. Wiley
     Interscience, 2001.
[45] A. Gelman, J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, D. B. Dunson, A. Vehtari, and D. B.
     Rubin, Bayesian Data Analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 11 2013.

[46] A. C. Nugent, A. G. Thomas, M. Mahoney, A. Gibbons, J. T. Smith, A. J.
     Charles, J. S. Shaw, J. D. Stout, A. M. Namyst, A. Basavaraj, E. Earl,
     T. Riddle, J. Snow, S. Japee, A. J. Pavletic, S. Sinclair, V. Roopchansingh,
     P. A. Bandettini, and J. Chung, “The nimh intramural healthy volunteer
     dataset: A comprehensive meg, mri, and behavioral resource,” Scientific
     Data 2022 9:1, vol. 9, pp. 1–10, 8 2022.
[47] P. J. McMahon, A. Hricik, J. K. Yue, A. M. Puccio, T. Inoue, H. F.
     Lingsma, S. R. Beers, W. A. Gordon, A. B. Valadka, G. T. Manley, D. O.
     Okonkwo, the TRACK-TBI investiga, S. S. Casey, S. R. Cooper, K. Dams-
     O’Connor, D. K. Menon, M. D. Sorani, E. L. Yuh, P. Mukherjee, D. M.
     Schnyer, and M. J. Vassar, “Symptomatology and functional outcome in
     mild traumatic brain injury: Results from the prospective track-tbi study,”
     Journal of Neurotrauma, vol. 31, pp. 26–33, 1 2014.
[48] G. Theaud, J.-C. Houde, A. Boré, F. Rheault, F. Morency, and M. De-
     scoteaux, “Tractoflow: A robust, efficient and reproducible diffusion
     mri pipeline leveraging nextflow {&} singularity,” NeuroImage, vol. 218,
     p. 116889, 9 2020.
[49] M. Jenkinson, C. F. Beckmann, T. E. J. Behrens, M. W. Woolrich, and
     S. M. Smith, “Fsl.,” NeuroImage, vol. 62, pp. 782–90, 8 2012.
[50] E. Garyfallidis, M. Brett, B. Amirbekian, A. Rokem, S. V. D. Walt, M. De-
     scoteaux, I. Nimmo-smith, and D. Contributors, “Dipy, a library for the
     analysis of diffusion mri data,” Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, vol. 8, pp. 1–
     5, 2014.
[51] V. Fonov, A. Evans, R. McKinstry, C. Almli, and D. Collins, “Unbiased
     nonlinear average age-appropriate brain templates from birth to adult-
     hood,” NeuroImage, vol. 47, p. S102, 7 2009.
[52] B. B. Avants, N. Tustison, and G. Song, “Advanced normalization tools
     (ants),” Insight J, vol. 2, pp. 1–35, 2009.




                                        29
Supplementary Material
6    Location and Scale (L/S) ComBAT
Follow up of section 2.1 in the paper, L/S ComBAT (c.f. section 2.3 of [19])
estimates the parameters α̂v ,β̂v , γ̂iv and δ̂iv following a maximum likelihood of
Gaussian distributions. As such, the regression vector β̂v and the intercept α̂v
are obtained with an ordinary least-square approach. This involves pooling data
from every location v (voxel or brain region) and from every patient j across all
sites i, and use the usual regression solution [43]:

                              [α̂v , β̂v ]T = (X T X)−1 X T yv ,                    (26)

where X is the matrix of covariate vectors from every participant across all
sites, and yv is a vector containing the metric associated with location v for
every participant in all sites. According to this framework, the global intercept
α̂v represents the average feature value at location v for all images across all
sites, excluding the effect of covariates, namely
                                       1 X
                               α̂v =         (yijv − xTij β̂v ),                    (27)
                                       JI ij

where JI is the total number of subjects across all sites.
    The additive and multiplicative site-specific biases γ̂iv and δ̂iv are determined
by taking the mean and variance of the rectified value at location v for all images
acquired at site i:
                                       1 X
                              γ̂iv =        (yijv − α̂v − xTij β̂v ),               (28)
                                       Ji j

                   2         1 X
                 δ̂iv =            (yijv − α̂v − xTij β̂v − γ̂iv )2 .               (29)
                          Ji − 1 i

    Once these parameters estimated (namely α̂v , βˆv , γ̂iv , and δ̂iv ), the harmo-
              harm
nized values yijv  can be computed as follows (Eq(3) in the paper):

                  harm
                              yijv − α̂v − ⃗xTij β̂v − γ̂iv
                 yijv  =                                      + α̂v + ⃗xTij β̂v .   (30)
                                           δ̂iv
    The reader shall note that when the total number of images JI acquired
across all sites is sufficiently large, the maximum likelihood estimate of β̂v and
α̂v from Eqs 26 and 27 can be considered unbiased. However, for any site i with
a low number of acquired images (a common scenario in clinical practice) γ̂iv
and δ̂iv are biased and thus should not be relied upon. One common solution
to that problem is to estimate γ̂iv and δ̂iv following a Bayesian maximum a
posteriori formulation while keeping as is Eq(26) and (27) for estimating β̂v and
α̂v [15, 19, 28]. Details on the Bayesian formulation are provided in section S.2.


                                                  30
7    ComBAT
Follow up of section 2.1 in the paper. For a step-by-step explanation, please re-
fer to figure 1 of [28]. This section explains the Bayesian approach of ComBAT
for estimating the harmonization parameters α̂v , βˆv , γ̂iv , σ̂v , and δ̂iv . To do
so, ComBAT begins by standardizing the data, which involves subtracting the
population intercept, regression weight and variance, represented mathemati-
cally as
                                     yijv − α̂v − xTij β̂v
                             zijv =                        ,                     (31)
                                             σ̂v
where the variance is determined with the usual empitical equation:
                              1 X
                     σ̂v2 =         (yijv − α̂v − xTij β̂v − γ̂iv )2 ,          (32)
                              JI ij

and γ̂iv is calculated following Eq (28).
                                                        ∗
    At this stage, the bias of each site is denoted as γiv and the variance of each
         2∗
site is δiv . These two variables are estimated by maximizing their posterior
distributions rather than their likelihood distributions. According to Bayes’
                              ∗        2∗
theorem, the posteriors of γiv   and δiv  can be expressed as
                         ∗          2∗              ∗     2∗      ∗
                     P (γiv |ziv , δiv ) ∝ P (ziv |γiv , δiv )P (γiv ),         (33)
                         2∗         ∗               ∗     2∗      2∗
                     P (δiv |ziv , γiv ) ∝ P (ziv |γiv , δiv )P (δiv ),         (34)
where
                                    ∗     2∗         ∗     2∗
                           P (ziv |γiv , δiv ) = N (γiv , δiv ),                (35)
                                      ∗
                                  P (γiv ) = N (µi , τi2 ),                     (36)
                                      2∗
                                  P (δiv ) = IG(λi , θi ),                      (37)
are a Gaussian likelihood, a Gaussian prior and an inverse Gamma prior, re-
spectively.
   The hyperparameters of the prior distributions µi , τi2 , λi , and θi are esti-
mated based on the moment of these distributions. Specifically, µi and τi2 are
derived from the first and second moment of a Gaussian distribution, namely
                          1X ∗                      1 X ∗
                  µ̄i =       γ̂         τ̄i2 =          (γ̂ − µ̄i )2           (38)
                          v v iv                  V − 1 v iv

                                                                  ∗
                                                                     = J1i j zijv
                                                                          P
    where V is the number of brain regions (or voxels) and γ̂iv
is the region-wise and sitewise model intercept of the standardized data and
should not be confused with γ̂iv from Eq (28).
    To estimate λi and θi , one must
                                   P first calculate   the voxel-wise and sitewise
                                                ∗ 2
                       2∗
standardized variance δiv   = Ji1−1 j (zijv − γ̂iv ) . This variance shall not be
                 2                                                      2∗
confused with δ̂iv from Eq ( 29). The
                                   P empirical  mean andPvariance of δiv   across
                                 1     2∗       2     1       2∗        2
all voxels is computed as ḠI = V   v δiv and S̄I = V −1  v (δiv − ḠI ) . Then,


                                             31
by equating ḠI and V̄i2 to the first and second theoretical moments of the inverse
gamma distribution, we get
                               θi                           θi2
                     Ḡi =                 S̄i2 =                       ,               (39)
                             λi − 1                  (λi − 1)2 (λi − 2)
which can be rearranged to estimate the two hyperparameters,
                                               Ḡ2i + 2S̄i2
                                      λ̄i =                                             (40)
                                                    S̄i2

                                         Ḡ3i + GS ¯ 2i
                                   θ̄i =                .                               (41)
                                              S̄i2
    Now that the hyperparameters of the likelihood and prior distributions have
been estimated, by expanding Eqs (33) and (34) and integrating them with
Eqs (38) and (39), we arrive at the mathematical expectation of the posterior
                                              ∗       2∗
distributions, which yields the estimates of γiv and δiv :
                                                                ∗
                        ∗        ∗          2∗        Ji τ̂i2 γ̂iv     2∗
                                                                   + δ̄iv µ̄i
                      γ̄iv = Ê(γiv |ziv , δiv )=               2     2∗
                                                                                        (42)
                                                          Ji τ̄i + δ̄iv
                                                                              ∗ 2
                                                  θ̄i + 21 j (zijv − γ̄iv
                                                            P
                   2∗       2∗          ∗
                                                                               )
                 δ̄iv = Ê(δiv |zijv , γiv )=
                                            Ji
                                                                                    .   (43)
                                            2 + λ̄i − 1
                                                      ∗        2∗
    Given the interdependency of Eqs (42) and (43), γ̄iv and δ̄iv are computed
through an iterative process. This starts with a reasonable initial value for
  2∗          2∗                                    ∗                                2∗
δ̄iv (e.g., δ̂iv ), followed by the calculation of γiv , and then re-estimation of δ̄iv
                     ∗
using the new γiv value, and so forth. This cycle is repeated until convergence
is achieved.
     Once all ComBAT parameters have been empirically estimated, data har-
monization is performed as follows:
                     ComBAT           σ̂v            ∗
                    yijv    =           ∗
                                           (zijv − γ̄iv ) + σ̂v + xTij β̂v .            (44)
                                      δ̄iv
   The reader shall notice that this harmonization function is different from
that of L/S Combat in Eq. (30).


8     Maximum a posteriori for the estimation of
      the moving site parameter β⃗M v
As mentioned in Section 2.3, β  ⃗M v is estimated by maximizing the posterior
                ⃗
distribution P (βM v | DM v ) where DM v = {YM v , XM } contains the list of all
values and covariables of the moving site M at location v. Following Bayes’
theorem, one can reformulate the posterior as

                        ⃗M v | DM v ) =       P (DM v | β⃗M v ) P (β⃗M v )
                     P (β                                                  ,            (45)
                                                     P (DM v )

                                                32
where P (DM v | β⃗M v ) is the likelihood pdf, P (β⃗M v ) is the prior pdf, and P (DM v )
is the evidence. Since P (DM v ) is independent from the to-be-optimized param-
eters β⃗M v , it can be considered a multiplicative factor and thus
                      P (β⃗M v | DM v ) ∝ P (DM v | β⃗M v ) P (β⃗M v ).                 (46)
   Since both P (DM v | β⃗M v ) and P (β⃗M v ) are Gaussian distributions (see Eqs. (11)
and (12) in the paper), the posterior is also Gaussian. Starting with the likeli-
hood pdf of the entire population DM v ,
                                            JM
                                            Y
                      P (DM v | β⃗M v ) =            ⃗ M j , yM jv | β⃗M v ),
                                                  P (ϕ                                  (47)
                                            j=1

             ⃗ M j , yM jv | β
and since P (ϕ               ⃗M v ) is Gaussian for each data point,
                               JM
                                                                                !
                               Y     1          (yM jv − β⃗M
                                                           T ⃗
                                                             v ϕM j )
                                                                     2
          P (DM v | β⃗M v ) =     √       exp −            2                        ,   (48)
                              j=1
                                    2π σM               2σM

which simplifies to
                                                                      
                                             JM
                              1           1  X
   P (DM v | β⃗M v ) =     2 )JM /2
                                    exp− 2      (yM jv − β⃗M
                                                            T ⃗
                                                              v ϕM j )
                                                                      2
                                                                         .              (49)
                       (2πσM             2σM j=1

   The prior distribution is also Gaussian, with a mean vector of β⃗Rv (Eq. 12)
and covariance Σ0 :
                                                                            
                      1                  1 ⃗
   P (β⃗M v ) =                  exp   −   (β M v − ⃗Rv )T Σ−1 (β
                                                    β       0
                                                                ⃗M v − β⃗Rv ) . (50)
                (2π)P/2 |Σ0 |1/2         2
    Multiplying Eqs. (49) and (50), the posterior becomes
                                                                                      
                              JM
   ⃗M v | DM v ) ∝ exp− 1                              1 ⃗
                              X
                                           ⃗T ϕ
                                  (yM jv − β    ⃗     2          ⃗ T −1 ⃗         ⃗ 
P (β                       2                 M v M j ) − (βM v − βRv ) Σ0 (βM v − βRv ) .
                         2σM  j=1
                                                        2
                                                                                        (51)
   Maximizing Eq. (51) is equivalent to minimizing its negative log:
                     JM
⃗M v = arg min    1 X                           1 ⃗
β                  2     (yM jv − β⃗M
                                    T ⃗       2          ⃗ T −1 ⃗         ⃗
                                      v ϕM j ) + (βM v − βRv ) Σ0 (βM v − βRv )
            ⃗M v 2σM
            β                                   2
                     j=1
                                                                                  (52)
and assuming Σ0 is diagonal, the equation reduces to
                 "J                                                            #
                  X M

 β⃗M v = arg min      (yM jv − β⃗ ϕ
                                 T ⃗ M j ) + ⃗λ (β⃗M v − β⃗Rv ) (β⃗M v − β⃗Rv ) , (53)
                                    Mv
                                          2    T               T
             ⃗M v
             β      j=1

with ⃗λ ∈ RP + a vector of hyperparameters. By forcing ∇β⃗M v L(β⃗M v ) = 0, one
arrives at
                 β⃗M
                   T       T      ⃗ T −1 (ΦT Y
                     v = (ΦM ΦM + λ I)
                                             ⃗       ⃗T ⃗
                                            M M v + λ βRv ),                (54)
which corresponds to Eq. (13) in the paper.


                                             33
Maximum a posteriori of the moving site variance
parameter d2M v
As mentioned in Section 2.3, the moving site variance d2M v is estimated by
maximizing the posterior distribution P (d2M v | ZM v ), where ZM v = {zM jv =
        ⃗T β
yM jv − ϕ    ⃗
          M j M v , ∀j}. Following Bayes’ theorem:

                                            P (ZM v | d2M v )P (d2M v )
                     P (d2M v | ZM v ) =                                .           (55)
                                                   P (ZM v )

   Since ZM v is a zero-centered Gaussian with variance d2M v , we assume that
                                       JM
                                                                            !
                                                         2
                                       Y      1         zM jv
                 P (ZM v | d2M v ) =       √       exp − 2                      .   (56)
                                       j=1
                                             2πdMv      2d Mv


     If we use a Gamma function as the prior P (d2M v ) with τ = 1/d2M v , we
get that the prior of the variance of the moving site is driven by the unbiased
estimation of the variance of the reference site computer by Eq.(9). This leads
to :
                                  ba0
                         P (τ ) = 0 τ a0 −1 exp(−b0 τ ).                   (57)
                                 Γ(a0 )
    Since the posterior is the product of a Gaussian and a Gamma distribution,
it remains Gamma-distributed with parameters
                                                             J
                                                             M
                                 JM                       1X
                     an = a0 +      ,        bn = b0 +         z2 .
                                  2                       2 j=1 M jv

   Thus the MAP estimate of τ is
                                  1        a0 + JM /2
                          τ=          =                     ,                       (58)
                                d2M v   b0 + 21 ΣJj=1
                                                   M   2
                                                      zM jv
                                                | {z }
                                                       JM dˆ2M v


leading to
                                           2b0 + JM dˆ2M v
                               d2M v =                     ,                        (59)
                                             2a0 + JM
and, by setting a0 = ν0 /2 and b0 = d2T v ν0 /2, the last equation simplifies to

                                        ν0 d2T v   JM dˆ2M v
                           d2M v =               +           ,                      (60)
                                       ν0 + J M    ν0 + JM
which corresponds to Eq. (17) in the paper.




                                             34
9     Clinical-ComBAT algorithms
Algorithm 1: Clinical-ComBAT-Fit
 Input:
 DT v = {(yT 1v , ⃗xT 1 ), . . . , (yT NT v , ⃗xT JT )} ;         // Target site data
 DM v = {(yM 1v , ⃗xM 1 ), . . . , (yM NM v , ⃗xM JM )} ;         // Moving site data
 P, ⃗λ, ν0 ;                                                       // Hyperparameters
 Output:
 {d2M v , β⃗M v , d2T v , β
                          ⃗T v } ;                        // Harmonization parameters

    Target site parameters:
    ⃗ T j ← (⃗xT · ⃗xT j + 1)P ∀j
    ϕ                                                                      Eq. (19)
               Tj
    ΦT ← stack all vectors ϕ   ⃗ T j into a matrix
    ⃗          T      −1 T
    βT v ← (ΦT ΦT ) ΦT YT v                                                Eq. (23)
                PJT             ⃗ T β⃗T v )2
    d2 ← 1
     Tv       JT       (yT jv − ϕ
                     j=1              Tj                                   Eq. (24)

    Moving site parameters:
    ϕ⃗ M j ← (⃗xT · ⃗xM j + 1)P ∀j                                         Eq. (19)
                Mj
    ΦM ← stack all vectors ϕ   ⃗ M j into a matrix
    β⃗M v ← (ΦM ΦM + ⃗λ I) (ΦTM YM v + ⃗λT β⃗T v )
                T          T  −1
                                                                           Eq. (28)
                 PJM
    dˆ2 ← 1
     Mv    JM       j=1(yM jv − ϕ⃗ T β⃗M v )2
                                        Mj
     2     JM dˆ2M v    ν d2T v
    dM v ← JM +ν0 + JM0 +ν     0
                                                                           Eq. (32)

    return {d2M v , β⃗M v , d2T v , β⃗T v }




Algorithm 2: Clinical-ComBAT-Apply
 Input:
 DM v = {(yM 1v , ⃗xM 1 ), . . . , (yM NM v , ⃗xM JM
                                                   ′ )} ;      // Moving site data
 P ;                                                             // Hyperparameter
    2     ⃗          2   ⃗
 {dM v , βM v , dT v , βT v } ;                          // Precomputed parameters
 Output:
 {ŷM 1v , . . . , ŷM JM v } ;                               // Harmonized values

                      ′
    for j = 1 . . . JM  do
        ⃗
       ϕM j ← (⃗xM j · ⃗xM j + 1)P
                     T
                                                                           Eq. (19)
                  (y   −β⃗T ϕ ⃗   )
          ŷM jv ← M jv d2 M v M j d2T v + β⃗TT v ϕ
                                                  ⃗T j                     Eq. (21)
                         Mv


    return {ŷM 1v , ŷM 2v , . . . , ŷM JM v }




                                                   35
Algorithm 3: Harmonization-Qc (with Bhattacharya Distance)
 Input:
 D̂M v = {(ŷM 1v , ⃗xM 1 ), . . . , (ŷM NM v , ⃗xM JM′ )} ;       // Harmonized data
 DT v = {(yT 1v , ⃗xT 1 ), . . . , (yT NT v , ⃗xT JT )} ;          // Target site data
 thr ;                                                                    // Threshold
 β⃗T v ;                                                      // Target site parameter
 Output:
 dB ;                                                         // Bhattacharya Distance

 Data rectification:
                       ⃗T β
 ZT = {zT jv = yT jv − ϕ     ⃗               ⃗T
                         T j T v | ∀(yT jv , ϕT j ) ∈ DT v }
                         ⃗  T ⃗
 ZM = {ẑM jv = ŷM jv − ϕM j βT v | ∀(ŷM jv , ϕ⃗ T ) ∈ D̂M v }
                                                   Mj

 Compute the Bhattacharyya distance:
 µT = mean(ZT ), σT2 = var(ZT )
                    2
 µM = mean(ZM ), σM   = var(ZM )
                     2          2   2
 dB = 14 (µσT2−µM)             σT +σM
              +σ 2
                   + 21 ln     2σT σM
             T   M


 return dB




                                          36
Algorithm 4: Hyperparameter Auto-Tuning
  Input:
  DT v = {(yT 1v , ⃗xT 1 ), . . . , (yT NT v , ⃗xT JT )} ;         // Target site data
  DM v = {(yM 1v , ⃗xM 1 ), . . . , (yM NM v , ⃗xM JM )} ;         // Moving site data
  P, ν0 , τ1 , τ2 , k, λmin ;                                       // Hyperparameters
  Output:
 ⃗λ ;                                                      // Harmonization parameters

 Initialization of ⃗λ:
 {d2M v , β⃗M v , d2T v , β
                          ⃗T v } ← ClinicalComBAT-Fit(P, ⃗0, ν0 , DT v , DM v )
          ⃗ [0]
          β
 ⃗λ0 ←     Tv
          ⃗T v
          β
 f ound ← F alse
 λ ← λmin

 while f ound = F alse do
   ⃗λ ← λ · ⃗λ0
    {d2M v , β⃗M v , d2T v , β⃗T v } ← ClinicalComBAT-Fit(P, ⃗λ, ν0 , DT v , DM v )
    Compute dmin , dmax , d1 , d2
    if sign(dmin τ1 − d1 ) + sign(d2 − dmax τ2 ) + 2 = 0             Eq. (35) then
        f ound ← T rue
    else
        λ←λ×k ;                     // k > 1 is the multiplicative step size

 return ⃗λ


10    Supplementary Figures




                                          37
Figure 10: Harmonization of fractional anisotropy (FA) using Clinical-ComBAT
and ComBAT for the NIMH site (green), and Track-TBI site A (blue) and site
B (cyan). The top three rows show harmonized white matter skeleton masks
with corresponding DB values, where orange dots indicate TBI subjects. The
bottom row presents stacked histograms of DB across all white matter bundles
and sites. Lower DB values indicate closer alignment with the reference site,
underscoring both the necessity of harmonization and the superior performance
of Clinical-ComBAT over ComBAT.




                                     38
Figure 11: Harmonization of Apparent Fiber Density (AFD) using Clinical-
ComBAT and ComBAT for the NIMH site (green), and Track-TBI site A (blue)
and site B (cyan). The top three rows show harmonized white matter skeleton
masks with corresponding DB values, where orange dots indicate TBI subjects.
The bottom row presents stacked histograms of DB across all white matter bun-
dles and sites. Lower DB values indicate closer alignment with the reference
site, underscoring both the necessity of harmonization and the superior perfor-
mance of Clinical-ComBAT over ComBAT.




                                      39
