                                            Differential Dynamic Causal Nets: Model Construction,
                                            Identification and Group Comparisons
                                            Kang You1 , Gary Green2,3 , Jian Zhang1,*

                                            1 School of Engineering, Mathematics and Physics, University of Kent,
                                            Canterbury, Kent CT2 7NF, UK.
                                            2 York Neuroimaging Centre, The Biocentre, York Science Park, University
                                            of York, Heslington, York YO10 5NY, UK.
arXiv:2601.21478v1 [q-bio.NC] 29 Jan 2026




                                            3 Innovision IP Ltd, Culham Innovation Centre, D5 Culham Science Centre,
                                            Abingdon, Oxfordshire, OX14 3DB, UK.

                                            * Correponding author: Jian Zhang (J.Zhang-79@kent.ac.uk)


                                            Abstract
                                            Pathophysiolpgical modelling of brain systems from microscale to macroscale remains
                                            difficult in group comparisons partly because of the infeasibility of modelling the
                                            interactions of thousands of neurons at the scales involved. Here, to address the
                                            challenge, we present a novel approach to construct differential causal networks directly
                                            from electroencephalogram (EEG) data. The proposed network is based on
                                            conditionally coupled neuronal circuits which describe the average behaviour of
                                            interacting neuron populations that contribute to observed EEG data. In the network,
                                            each node represents a parameterised local neural system while directed edges stand for
                                            node-wise connections with transmission parameters. The network is hierarchically
                                            structured in the sense that node and edge parameters are varying in subjects but
                                            follow a mixed-effects model. A novel evolutionary optimisation algorithm for
                                            parameter inference in the proposed method is developed using a loss function derived
                                            from Chen-Fliess expansions of stochastic differential equations. The method is
                                            demonstrated by application to the fitting of coupled Jansen-Rit local models. The
                                            performance of the proposed method is evaluated on both synthetic and real EEG data.
                                            In the real EEG data analysis, we track changes in the parameters that characterise
                                            dynamic causality within brains that demonstrate epileptic activity. We show evidence
                                            of network functional disruptions, due to imbalance of excitatory-inhibitory
                                            interneurons and altered epileptic brain connectivity, before and during seizure periods.

                                            Key words: Differential network of dynamic causal models, M/EEG scans, epileptic
                                            brain network, dynamic causal nets, and mixed-effects models.


                                            1    Introduction
                                            Non-invasive imaging techniques electro- and magneto-encephalography (EEG and
                                            MEG) are often used for dynamic causal discovery and causality quantification in group
                                            comparison with neurological disorders such as stroke, motor neuron disease,
                                            Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and epilepsy (Choi et al., 2023; Aljalal et al.,
                                            2022; Ghassemkhani et al., 2025; Pyrzowski et al., 2015; Ogrim et al., 2012; Rosch et al.,
                                            2018) among others. M/EEG are promising tools for studying brain dynamics and




                                                                                                                                1/40
enable researchers and clinicians to measure and characterise brain activity in fine
temporal detail thus improving the understanding of the etiology of neurological
conditions as well as allowing the development brain-based technologies.
    M/EEG imaging revealed a rich catalogue of behaviour in both resting and active
brains.. For example, Papadopoulou et al. (2015) used spectral EEG data to profile
epileptic seizure activity in the brain. Özbek et al. (2015) demonstrated that the frontal
alpha/theta power ratio derived from the resting-state EEG data is a promising
biomarker for distinguishing early-onset Alzheimer’s disease from health controls. Duffy
and Als (2012) found that EEG spectral coherence discriminates children with autism
from healthy controls.
    Using MEG spectral data, van Es et al. (2025) showed that, although brain network
dynamics are stochastic, their activities have a robust cyclical pattern. Zhang and Green
(2025) proposed a novel method for detecting mild traumatic brain injury by using
spectral likelihood ratio statistics of MEG scan data when controls are not homogenous.
    Complementary to the aforementioned spectral analysis, dynamic causal modelling
(DCM) of E/MEG data offers a powerful way to infer effective connectivity within the
brain through coupled neuronal circuits with certain biophysics-informed parameters
that are responsible for what are observed in the brain (Friston et al., 2003; Kiebel
et al., 2008; Grefkes et al., 2008, 2010; Herz et al., 2014; Rehme et al., 2011; Rosch
et al., 2018; Forrester et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2025). Effective connectivity, referring to
the causal influences that different parts of the brain exert over each other, provides a
direct understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying various cognitive processes in
the brain. Instead of modelling individual neurons, DCM describes the average
behaviour of neural populations. In particular, allowing for dynamic causal interactions
between distinct brain regions, DCM can reveal biophysics-informed links between
microscopic neural activity and macroscopic brain phenomena. By adjusting model
parameters, researchers can simulate the transition from normal brain rhythms to
pathological states, providing valuable insights into disease mechanisms and potential
treatment strategies (Wendling et al., 2024; Friston et al., 2019). Sotero et al. (2007)
used neural circuits to simulate EEG signals, helping to elucidate how the macroscopic
electrical activity recorded from the scalp emerges from underlying neural dynamics.
Using the DCM approach, Papadopoulou et al. (2015) tracked slow modulations in
synaptic gain for a cohort of epileptic patients. Chen et al. (2009) employed spectral
DCM on MEG scans to infer functional asymmetries in inter- and
cross-frequency-coupling between brain regions during the period that subjects visually
processes faces. This approach can be used to model brain activity on a whole brain
scale. With the Human Connectome Project dataset, Singh et al. (2025) developed a
large scale, data-driven mean field cortical model for activities in the brain, involving
hundreds of interacting neural populations.
    Following Friston et al. (2019), a multiple cortical column DCM can be described by
the following set of neural mass stochastic differential equations:
     dx(t)   =   f (x(t), u(t); θ, K)dt + Γ(θ)dw(t),      x(0) = x0 ;    y(t) = h(x(t)), (1)
where w(t) is a multivariate Gaussian white noise process, x(t) is a vector of p hidden
states, x0 contains initial values of states, y(t) is the partial observation of hidden
states, u(t) is an external input, f is a nonlinear vector field, h is a function from
Rp → R with θ being a vector of local node parameters, K a matrix of connection
parameters between nodes, Γ(θ) is a degenerate diffusion coefficient matrix. In the past
two decades, considerable progress has been made in the development of dynamic causal
modelling (Friston et al., 2019; Park et al., 2021; Forrester et al., 2020; Singh et al.,
2025), and references therein. Despite this, a brain-wide search for dynamic causal
abnormalities across spatial scales remains difficult, partly because of the challenges in
modelling neural connectivities at large scale.




                                                                                         2/40
    The first challenge is about how to solve and sample from nonlinear neural mass
differential equations when the parameters involved are only partially identifiable. The
following bilinear approximation of the equations is often used in the literature e.g.,
(Friston et al., 2003; Forrester et al., 2020) :

       dx(t) ≈ f (x0 , 0; θ, K) + A + uT (t)B x(t) + Cu(t) dt + Γ(θ)dw(t),
                                                              

       x(0)   =   x0 ,   y(t) = h(x(t)),
                                  2
             ∂f                   ∂ f                      ∂f
where A = ∂x    |u=0,x=x0 , B = ∂x∂u   |u=0,x=x0 and C = ∂u   |u=0,x=x0 . This
approximation is followed by a variational Bayesian analysis in order to select an
optimal dynamic causal model from a list of pre-specified candidates.
    Although the bilinear approximation can capture some parts of input-state
interactions in the model (1), its accuracy deteriorates when strongly nonlinear regimes
are introduced by spiking, bifurcations and saturation.
    Instead, Kulik et al. (2023) used a fourth order stochastic Runge-Kutta method to
numerically solve the coupled differential equations involved in the Jansen-Rit model.
In these situations, recomputing the Jacobian-updating integrator continuously is
required to solve the equations, making the computation infeasible when fitting many
pairwise coupled DCMs to the data. On the other hand, a Chen-Fliess expansion (Chen,
1954; Fliess, 1981) can solve the above differential equations without using any
approximation of the nonlinear vector fields. However, it still remains difficult to
perform a Bayesian data analysis when the vector fields are highly nonlinear.
    The second challenge is that some states x(t) are only partially observed at discrete
time points. Then the exact likelihoods for the transition densities are difficult to trace.
To estimate these likelihoods, Pokern et al. (2009) proposed a data-augmentation
algorithm to impute the hidden states. The computation was intensive and it did not
always converge to the true values when many local hypoelliptic diffusions were
included.
    The third challenge is about how to implement large scale dynamic causal models,
subject to a limited resource of computation (e.g., Honey et al., 2007; Li et al., 2020;
Rosch et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2025). To reduce the model dimension, Forrester et al.
(2020) made a very restrictive assumption that the cortical columns are homogeneous in
the sense that the column parameters are kept the same across the columns.
    The fourth challenge is about heterogeneity of human brains even when case and
control subjects are matched by ages and genders (Zhang and Green, 2025; Li et al.,
2025). It is unclear how to take individual brain differences into account in a dynamic
causal model with M/EEG data. Finally, although the excitation-inhibition imbalance
across columns has been shown to underlie an epileptic form of brain activity ( e.g.,
Friston et al., 2016), it is unclear how such a spatial distribution pattern is associated
with epilepsy.
    Here, to address these challenges, we first develop an EEG data-driven network of
conditionally coupled dynamic causal models (NccDCM) across multiple cortical regions
for cases and controls respectively, where each node corresponds to a functional unit
that can be represented by a neural mass model, and with edges informed by effective
connectivity. For simplicity, neural mass activities are described by stochastic
Jansen-Rit models (Jansen and Rit, 1995; Ableidinger et al., 2017; Forrester et al.,
2020).
    We then calculate differential causal nets between cases and controls to quantify
abnormal causality in patients. By these nets, we are able to identify intrinsic and
extrinsic dynamic connectivity patterns that are associated with brain diseases. In the
proposed network, each node describes a channel of neuron populations which may
receive input signals from other channels. The strengths of directed connectivity
between nodes are regularised by biophysics-informed parameters.




                                                                                      3/40
    The above network structure allows for the nesting of sub-networks within a
composite network, where the followed differential analysis of brain systems at different
levels of detail can be based. The following assumptions are made in the NccDCM:
Within each channel/node, the neurons can be modelled by three populations, namely,
pyramidal cells (PCs), excitatory interneurons (EINs) and inhibitory interneurons
(IINs), forming two feedback loops- a fast excitatory feedback loop with external input
from paired opposite regions as well as an input of rough path noise from background; a
slow inhibitory feedback loop. The output represents the membrane potential of
pyramidal neurons, which are signals measured by the EEG device. The coupling within
a node and between nodes are regularised by structural parameters. However, it should
be noted that the precise nature of the within channel model is not restrictive and more
complex models can be incorporated.
    A conditional inference of the proposed model is implemented as follows: We first
estimate NccDCMs by ccDCM screening, followed by inferring disease-associated causal
nets from estimated contrasts between case and control subjects. The conditional
estimation is carried out through minimising a profiled loss function based on what is
called Chen-Fliess expansions of stochastic differential equations (Ableidinger et al.,
2017; Chen, 1954; Fliess, 1981; Lyons, 1998). In the Chen-Fliess expansions, we solve
the stochastic differential equations by linear combinations of iterative integrals of the
vector of field functions. These estimated ccDCMs are then assembled via a post
analysis of variance (Anderson, 2017). Unlike the existing approaches, which assume
parameters to be known from diffusion-imaging data and previous literature (e.g.,
Forrester et al., 2020), we directly estimate local parameters in each node conditionally
on inputs from other nodes by using subject’s EEG data. This enables the inference of
the large number of node parameters feasible even when nodes are heterogeneous. The
estimated NccDCM allows us to investigate how neural activities in these
channels/nodes influence each other, particularly, when defected channels/nodes exhibit
pathological dynamics compared to healthy controls. Changes in these parameters
reflect alterations in the balance between excitation and inhibition, compensatory
adaption to abnormal inputs. We evaluate the proposed methodology on both simulated
data and a recently published benchmark dataset of scalp EEG recordings for a group
of pediatric epilepsy patients and their controls (OK et al., 2021). See Figure 9(a) for
an example of interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs) in the data and the bifurcation
behaviour of the fitted ccDCM. In the real data analysis, we treat IEDs as
electroencephalographic markers for epilepsy. IEDs reflect transient cortical
hyperexcitability in neuron populations and are useful biomarkers in diagnosis and
treatment of epilepsy. We are in particular interested in characterising the IED
associated epileptic networks via differential dynamic causal nets, which shed light on
the mechanisms of seizure propagation in brain regions.
    The contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, we develop a novel network
architecture that leverage the channel-wise coupling across a whole brain via hierarchical
mixed-effects modelling. We provide a conditional inference scheme to estimate
NccDCM. By the post analysis of variance, we demonstrate that the proposed modelling
is promising in discovering novel differential dynamic causal nets and in providing a
deep insight into abnormal connectivity in case subjects compared to healthy controls.
Secondly, fitting the proposed NccDCM to an epileptic case-control dataset, we identify
comprehensive neuronal circuits for a whole brain and reveal biophysics-informed
dynamic causal nets that underlie defected brain connectivity in epileptic patients.
    The remaining paper is organised as follows. The details of the proposed
methodology and optimisation algorithm are provided in Section 2. The applications of
the proposed methods to the IED dataset and synthetic data are presented in Section 3.
Discussion and conclusions are made in Section 4.




                                                                                    4/40
2       Methodology
In this section, we consider a network of conditionally coupled dynamic causal models
(ccDCMs) for cases and controls respectively. By conditionally coupling, we treat the
output of each channel as a response in turn, neural populations within the channel as
internal regressors and neural populations in outside channels as external regressors. We
also assume that the model parameters for subjects in case/control group follow a
mixed-effects model, accounting for group and subject-specific variations. The ccDCM
of each node is then estimated by minimising an estimated loss function (i.e., minus
twice estimated log-predictive-likelihood) based on an evolutionary optimisation
algorithm. The loss function is constructed by use of the Chen-Fliess expansion.
    We identify differential causal nets that differ cases from controls through post
multivariate analysis of variance based on a package of permutational multivariate
analysis of variance (Anderson, 2017).

2.1     Model and estimation
2.1.1    NccDCM
Suppose that there are Nk subjects in groups k, k = 0, 1. Each subject is scanned by an
EEG device of J channels over time interval [0, T ]. For each subject, outputs from
channels are divided into segments over Q disconnected time periods. In the epilepsy
study, these time-periods are referred to as seizure periods or pre-seizure periods. Let
 (i)k   (i)k      (i)k
x0nq , x1nq and x2nq denote the states of the three neuronal populations, namely,
pyramidal cells, excitatory interneurons and inhibitory interneurons in channel i for
subject n in group k. These statse can be described by three second-order ordinary
differential equations that model modulations in the mean membrane potential due to
the mean incoming firing rate from the same population and from other populations in
the neural mass. The incoming mean firing rates are activated through a sigmoid
transformation. These three equations are often re-expressed as six first order
                             (i)k      (i)k       (i)k
differential equations. Let ynq (t) = x1nq (t) − x2nq (t) denote the output of channel i in
period q for subject n in group k.
    To account for multiple nested sources of variability in the grouping subject data,
the NccDCM, taking channels as nodes, is structured in a hierarchical regression
manner: The node and edge parameters, differing between subjects, follow a
mixed-effects model. Under the assumption of node homogeneity, Forrester et al. (2020)
described the evolution of these state variables by J sets of six-dimensional stochastic
differential equations:
          (i)k           (i)k                (i)k   (i)k           (i)k       (i)k
        dx0nq (t)   =
                    x3nq (t) dt, dx1nq (t) = x4nq (t) dt, dx2nq (t) = x5nq (t) dt,
                    h                                                     i
          (i)k                                          (i)k         (i)k
        dx3nq (t) = Aknq a Sknq ynq  (i)k
                                          (t) − 2a x3nq (t) − a2 x0nq (t) dt,
                    n        h                                                     i
          (i)k                                                                 (i)k
        dx4nq (t) =   Aknq a Knq (i|j)k k
                                        Snq ynq  (j)k        k
                                                      (t) + C2nq Sknq C1nqk
                                                                              x0nq (t)
                                                     o
                            (i)k             (i)k
                    −2a x4nq (t) − a2 x1nq (t) dt + Aknq adw̃(i)k    nq (t),
                    h                                                                i
          (i)k         k       k                   (i)k          (i)k           (i)k
        dx5nq (t) = Bnq   b C4nq   Sknq C3nq k
                                                 x0nq (t) − 2b x5nq (t) − b2 x2nq (t) dt.
                        i = 1, 2, ...., J.
In node i, period q for subject n in group k, the error term is of form
                                                              
                               X                            
         dw̃(i)k
            nq (t) = P
                       (i) +         (i|j1 )k k
                                    Knq            (j1 )k
                                              Snq ynq     (t)  dt + dw(i)k
                                                                       nq (t),
                                  j1 ̸=i,j




                                                                                            5/40
            (i)k
where wnq (t) is a Gaussian noise process, P (i) is a basal extracortical input, Sknq (·) is a
sigmoid function, the parameters Aknq and Bnq   k
                                                   stand for the excitatory and inhibitory
                                              k
synaptic gains, the coupling parameters Cmnq , m = 1, 2, 3, 4 represent the average
numbers of synaptic connections between populations in each channel, and a−1 and b−1
are time constants. For 1 ≤ i ≤ J in turn, fixing the parameters in nodes except the
i-th, we solve the i-th set of stochastic differential equations.
    In the following, we further remove the node-homogeneity assumption, allowing the
node parameters to vary across nodes. For nodes 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ J and for subject n in
group k, we define sigmoid function
                                                         νmax
                       S(i|j)k
                        nq     (x(t)) =                    (i|j)k
                                                                                 , t ∈ [0, T ],
                                             1 + exp(r(ν0nq           − x(t)))

which activates input x(t). Here, νmax stands for the maximum firing rate of the neuron
             (i|j)k
population, ν0nq is the value for which a 50% of the maximum firing rate is attained
                                                                                                     (i|j)k
by neurons in channel i, and r > 0 is the slope of the above function at ν0nq . At
dendritic spines, incoming spikes are converted into postsynaptic potentials (PSPs)
through convolution with an alpha-type response function (Bastiaens et al., 2024).
PSPs are then converted into an average firing rate at the axon hillock using the above
sigmoid function. Following Ableidinger et al. (2017), we model the three neuron
populations in the channel i, when there is a signal transmission from the channel j to
                      (i|j)k
channel i with rate Knq , by the following stochastic Jansen-Rit differential equations:
     (i)k                 (i)k                 (i)k        (i)k                   (i)k        (i)k
  dx0nq (t)        =    x3nq (t) dt, dx1nq (t) = x4nq (t) dt, dx2nq (t) = x5nq (t) dt,
                        h                                                                     i
     (i)k                                                             (i)k          2 (i)k
  dx3nq (t)        =     A(i|j)k
                           nq     a S (i|j)k
                                      nq        y (i)k
                                                  nq   (t)    −  2a  x3nq  (t) −  a   x 0nq (t)   dt,               (2)
                        n            h                                                                        i
     (i)k                                                                      (i|j)k              (i|j)k (i)k
  dx4nq (t)        =      A(i|j)k
                           nq      a Knq  (i|j)k (i|j)k
                                                 Snq           (j)k
                                                             ynq    (t) + C2nq S(i|j)k  nq       C1nq x0nq (t)
                                                            o
                                (i)k               (i)k
                        −2a x4nq (t) − a2 x1nq (t) dt + A(i|j)k         nq    adw̃(i|j)k
                                                                                    nq     (t),
                        h                                                                                    i
     (i)k                  (i|j)k      (i|j)k                (i|j)k (i)k                 (i)k            (i)k
  dx5nq (t)        =     Bnq      b C4nq S(i|j)knq        C3nq x0nq (t) − 2b x5nq (t) − b2 x2nq (t) dt,

where
                                                                                  
                                     X                                          
              dw̃(i|j)k
                 nq     (t) =                (i|j1 )k (i|j1 )k
                                             Knq      Snq              (j1 )k
                                                                      ynq     (t)  dt + dw(i)k
                                                                                           nq (t),
                                  j1 ̸=i,j

given the external input from channel j and merging the inputs from other channels
                                               (i|j)k       (i|j)k
j1 ̸= i with the noise, the parameters Anq and Bnq                 stand for the excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic gains in channel i and period q for subject n in group k respectively,
                            (i|j)k          (i|j)k
the coupling parameters Cnq        and Cmnq , m = 1, 2, 3, 4 represent the average numbers
of synaptic connections between populations, and a−1 and b−1 are time constants. In
light of Grimbert and Faugeras (2006), we set the ranges for these parameters in Table 1.
    To summarise, in each ccDCM, three neural populations are described by
six-dimensional stochastic differential equations. The three neural populations are
interconnected through the coupling parameters in the equations, which determine the
                                                                                            (i|j)k
average evolution rates of the postsynaptic potential. The extrinsic parameter Knq
regulates the influence of neural populations in channel j on the excitation of neural
populations in channel i and thus determine the edge between nodes i and j in period q
                                         (i|j)k
for subject n in group k. A large Knq            increases the strength of neural
synchronization, changing oscillatory activity or pathological dynamics such as epileptic
                                  (i|j)k
discharges, while decreasing Knq         reduces inter-regional coupling, giving rise to more




                                                                                                                6/40
Table 1. Values of biophysical parameters in ccDCM.
 Parameter           Description                                                                         Value
    (i|j)k
 Anq                 Average excitatory synaptic gain                                                    [2.6, 6] mV
   (ilj)k
 θnq2                Ratio of average excitatory-inhibitory synaptic gains                               [0.05, 1]
    (i|j)k                                                                                                 (i|j)k    (ilj)k
 Bnq                 Average inhibitory synaptic gains                                                   Anq /θnq2
 a−1                 Time constant of excitatory postsynaptic potential                                  10 ms
 b−1                 Time constant of inhibitory postsynaptic potential                                  20 ms
           (i|j)k
 A(|j)k Cnq          Scaled avg. number of synapses between the populations                              [0, 1000]
    (i|j)k                                                                                                 (i|j)k
 C1nq                Avg. no. of syn. established by principal neurons on excitatory interneurons        Cnq
    (i|j)k                                                                                                      (i|j)k
 C2nq                Avg. no. of syn. established by excitatory interneurons on principal neurons        0.8 Cnq
    (i|j)k                                                                                                        (i|j)k
 C3nq                Avg. no. of syn. established by principal neurons on inhibitory interneurons        0.25 Cnq
    (i|j)k                                                                                                        (i|j)k
 C4nq                Avg. no. of syn. established by inhibitory interneurons on principal neurons        0.25 Cnq
    (i|j)k (i|j)k
 Anq Knq             Scaled edge from node j to node i                                                   [0, 700] mV
 vmax                Maximum firing rate of the neural populations                                       5 Hz
   (i|j)k
 v0nq                Value for which 50% of the maximum firing rate is attained                          [0, 10] mV
                                                    (i|j)k
 r                   Slope of the act. function at v0nq                                                  0.56 mV−1



localised dynamics. The above model supports oscillations that relate to input neural
rhythms, such as the well-known, alpha, beta, and gamma brain rhythms, and also
irregular, epileptic-like activity. It allows us to investigate how neural populations
interact under both deterministic and stochastic settings, and how coupling between
nodes modulates large-scale brain rhythms observed in E/MEG recordings (Forrester
                                                      (i|j)k
et al., 2020). As the nonlinear sigmoid function Snq is globally Lipschitz continuous,
it follows from Theorem 6.2.2 of Arnold (1974) that the Eq. (2) has a path-wise unique
and Ft -adapted solution. We fix a, b, vmax and r at their typical values as not all these
parameters in the ccDCM are estimable. The architecture of NccDCM can be described
by the following schematic diagram for five channels.
                                       [Put Fig. 1 here.]

   To facilitate the description of the nested links between subjects in different groups,
                                                 (i|j)k   (i|j)k
we introduce more notations. Let A(i|j)k
                                      n    = (An1 , ..., AnQ )T ,
                    (i|j)k         (i|j)k                   (i|j)k         (i|j)k
B (i|j)k
  n      = (Bn1              , ..., BnQ )T , C (i|j)k
                                               n      = (Cn1         , ..., CnQ )T ,
                    (i|j)k           (i|j)k        (i|j)k       (i|j)k         (i|j)k
K (i|j)k
   n      = (Kn1 , ..., KnQ )T and ν 0n = (ν0n1 , ..., ν0nQ )T for subject n in group
k = 0, 1, where 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ J , and 1 ≤ n ≤ N0 for k = 0 and 1 ≤ n ≤ N1 for k = 1.
Estimating these parameters depends on the external inputs as well as the internal
self-inputs of each target-channel when we fit a ccDCM to the data. Note that the
ccDCM is an ill-posed model and our simulations (see Section 3 ) show that the
parameters A(i|j)kn    and B (i|j)k
                              n     are not identifiable simultaneously. However, the ratio
  (i|j)k   (i|j)k
An       /Bn       can be estimated reasonably well. This motivates us to re-parameterise
                                            (i|j)k      (i|j)k
ccDCM by new parameters θ (i|j)k  nq    = (θnq1 , ..., θnq5 )T
       (i|j)k       (i|j)k      (i|j)k   (i|j)k   (i|j)k    (i|j)k        (i|j)k     (i|j)k
= (Anq , Anq /Bnq , Anq × Cnq , Anq × Knq , ν0nq )T . Putting these
parameters together forms a vector, namely θ (i|j)k
                                             nq     = (θ (i|j)k
                                                         nqc ). We assume that the
above parameters follow the mixed-effects model

 θ (i|j)k        (k)    (i|j)     (k)    (i|j)  (i|j)k
   nqc = δ qc + αqc + β qc + c01 αqc ⊙ β qc + r nqc ,                               k = 0, 1;   q = 1, ..., Q,      (3)

                                                        (1)    (2)
where ⊙ denotes the component-wise multiplication, αqc + αqc = 0, i̸=j β (i|j)
                                                                      P
                                                                            qc   = 0,
                                        P    (i|j)                 P  (i|j)
and c01 is the coefficient satifying c01 q |βqc + 1| ̸= 0 and c01 q |αqc + 1| ̸= 0.




                                                                                                                 7/40
Figure 1. A schematic diagram of NccDCM of five channels. The bigger circles stand
for channels, each described by a Jansen-Rit neural mass equation with the hidden states
                               (i|·)
x0 , x1 , and x2 . Parameters C· , A(i|·) , and B (i|·) denote the within-channel parameters
in channel i, taking into account the regressive effects of signal transmission from other
channels. Parameter K (i|j) defines a regressive coupling from a designated input channel
j to output channel i.




                                                                                       8/40
2.1.2     Estimation
The estimation is implemented in three steps: First solve the Jansen-Rit neural mass
differential equations, then construct the forward pairwise loss functions and finally
minimising the loss functions by some evolutionary optimisation algorithms.

 Solving the Jansen-Rit neural mass differential equations. To construct a loss
function for estimation, we need to compute the forward solutions of the Jansen-Rit
differential equations to predict the data points iteratively over a sequence of
time-instances. We adopt the Chen-Fliess expansion, a linear combination of iterative
Stratonovich integrals (Fliess, 1981), to solve the above Jansen-Rit input-output
differential system.
    For subject n in the group k, the EEG recordings in channel i over the q-th period
are partitioned into D epochs, each contains bq time-instants td0:bq −1 = (td0 , ..., tdbq −1 ), in
                                                                     
                               (i)k d     (i) d           (i) d
the form Y (i)k   d
             nq (t0:bq −1 ) = ynq (t0 ), ynq (t1 ), ..., ynq (tbq −1 ) , d = 1, 2, ..., D. Let
 (i)k
xsnq (t), s = 0, 1, 2 denote the corresponding three hidden neural states. Let
                                                    (i)k        (i)k
−{3} = {0, 1, 2, 4, 5}, −{1, 4} = {0, 2, 3, 5} and xInq (t) = (xsnq (t))s∈I . Denote the
                                                                                        (i)k            (i)k
truncated Chen-Fliess expansions of the conditional expectations of ynq (t) and xsnq (t),
s = 0, 2, 3, 5, given by the forms
                                                                                                   
                                   (i)k
           (i)k d
         ynq   (tm ) ≈ g tdm |x−{3}nq (td0 ), ynq  (i)k d        (i)k d
                                                        (t0 ), ẏnq   (t0 ), ynq    (t0 ), θ (i|j)k
                                                                                (j)k d
                                                                                             nq       ,
                                                                                                     
            (i)k                        (i)k
          x0nq (td0 ) ≈ g0 td−1bq −1 |x{0,3}nq (t0
                                                  d−1       (i)k d−1
                                                       ), ynq    (t0 ), ẏnq       (t0 ), θ (i|j)k
                                                                               (i)k d−1
                                                                                               nq       ,
                                                                     
            (i)k                        (i)k
          x2nq (td0 ) ≈ g2 td−1bq −1 |x−{1,4}nq (t0
                                                    d−1
                                                         ), θ (i|j)k
                                                              nq        ,
                                                                                                     
            (i)k                        (i)k                                                   (i|j)k
          x3nq (td0 ) ≈ g3 td−1      |x
                               bq −1 {0,3}nq 0 (t d−1
                                                       ), y (i)k d−1
                                                           nq    (t 0    ), ẏ (i)k d−1
                                                                              nq   (t 0  ), θ  nq       ,
                                                                     
            (i)k                        (i)k
          x5nq (td0 ) ≈ g5 td−1bq −1 |x−{1,4}nq (t0
                                                    d−1
                                                         ), θ (i|j)k
                                                              nq        ,                                 (4)

where g(t|·), g0 (t|·), g2 (t|·), g3 (t|·) and g5 (t|·) are defined in the Appendix A. Then the
truncated Chen-Fliess expansions of the above Jansen-Rit differential system can be
written as a conditionally deterministic function, say g or gm , plus a stochastic error
                                                 (i)k   (i)k
term. Moreover, in the expansions of x0nq , x2nq (t), the stochastic error terms, only
appearing in the terms of orders larger than 3, are bounded by |op ((t − t0 )4 )|, while in
                      (i)k
the expansion of ynq (t), the stochastic terms, not appearing in the term of order 1, is
               (i|j)k R t
of the form Anq a t0 (t − s)dw̃(i)k                             3
                                          nq (s) + op ((t − t0 ) ). Therefore, these approximate
functions of the conditional expectations in (4) provide the best one-step predictions of
 (i)k          (i)k
ynq (t) and xsnq (t).

Constructing forward pairwise loss functions.                        Let td0 = td−1
                                                                                bq −1 and initiate
 (i)k
x−{1,4}nq (t10 ) = (0, ..., 0). Given the observed D epoch data, we can iteratively make
one-step forward predictions of the hidden states and the channel outputs over
time-grids by using the truncated Chen-Fliess expansions and the difference operator as
follows: For the first epoch,
             (i)k 1            (i)k 1       (i)k 1
           ẏnq  (t0 )   ≈   (ynq  (t1 ) − ynq  (t0 ))/(t11 − t10 ),
                                                                                                 
                                     (i)k
            (i)k 1
          ybnq  (tm )    ≈   g t1m |x−{3}nq (t10 ), ynq
                                                     (i)k 1       (i)k 1
                                                         (t0 ), ẏnq  (t0 ), ynq  (t0 ), θ (i|j)k
                                                                              (j)k 1
                                                                                           nq       ,




                                                                                                         9/40
         (i)k                   (i)k              (i)k
where x{0:5}nq (t10 ) = (0, ynq (t10 ), 0, 0, ẏnq (t10 ), 0)T . In general, for m = 1, ..., bq − 1 and
d = 2, ..., D,
            (i)k d          (i)k d          (i)k d
          ẏnq  (t0 )   ≈ (ynq   (t1 ) − ynq    (t0 ))/(td1 − td0 ),
                                                                                                   
                                    (i)k
            (i)k d
          ybnq  (tm ) ≈ g tdm |x−{3}nq (td0 ), ynq   (i)k d        (i)k d
                                                          (t0 ), ẏnq               (t0 ), θ (i|j)k
                                                                               (j)k d
                                                                       (t0 ), ynq            nq       ,
                                                                                                   
             (i)k                        (i)k
           xb0nq (td0 ) ≈ g0 td−1
                                bq −1 |x{0,3}nq (t0
                                                    d−1      (i)k d−1
                                                         ), ynq    (t0 ), ẏnq   (t0 ), θ (i|j)k
                                                                              (i) d−1
                                                                                             nq       ,
                                                                      
             (i)k                        (i)k
           xb2nq (td0 ) ≈ g2 td−1
                                bq −1 |x−{1,4}nq (t0
                                                      d−1
                                                           ), θ (i|j)k
                                                                nq       ,
            (i)k                              (i)k
          b1nq (td0 )
          x             =(i)k d
                        ynq  (t0 ) + xb2nq (td0 ),
                                                                                               
           (i)k                       (i)k                                               (i|j)k
          b3nq (td0 ) ≈ g3 td−1
          x                        |x
                             bq −1 {0,3}nq 0  (t d−1
                                                     ), y (i)k d−1
                                                         nq   (t 0    ), ẏ (i) d−1
                                                                           nq 0(t   ), θ nq       ,
                                                                  
           (i)k                       (i)k
          b5nq (td0 ) ≈ g5 td−1
          x                  bq −1 |x−{1,4}nq (t0
                                                   d−1
                                                       ), θ (i|j)k
                                                            nq       ,
            (i)k                              (i)k
          b4nq (td0 )
          x                 (i)k d
                        = ẏnq          b5nq (td0 ).
                                (t0 ) + x

   We construct a forward pairwise loss function by the summation of the squared
prediction errors over the set of increasing time-instances
Tq = {t10 , ..., t1bq −1 ; ...; tD         D
                                 1 , ..., tbq −1 }. These time-instances are generated by
concatenating time-instances in epochs. For the subject n in group k, the resulting loss
function in the channel i, with a regressive input from the channel j, can be written as
                                                X                            2
                         L(i|j)k
                          nq     (θ (i|j)k
                                    nq     )=             (i)
                                                         ynq          (i)k
                                                              (t) − ybnq   (t) .
                                                t∈Tq


Minimising the above loss function with respect to parameters θ (i|j)k
                                                                nq     , we obtain the
           (i|j)k
estimate θ
         b
            nq    .

Solving the optimisation problem. Note that the above non-convex loss function
contains multiple local minima as only partial observations on hidden states are
available in dynamic causal modelling. We employ a genetic evolutionary algorithm of
Zhang and Sanderson (2009), called adaptive differential evolution with optional
external archive (JADE), to search for global minima. JADE evolves a population of
candidate solutions through mutation, crossover, and selection, aiming to explore the
landscape of the loss function around a global minimum. See the Appendix Sa, the
Supplementary Meterial for the further details of the JADE.

2.2     Identify differential causal nets via mixed-effects modelling
Having obtained estimated networks of ccDCMs for cases and controls respectively, we
want to find differential causal nets by contrasting cases and controls in terms of the
estimated within-channel parameters and the between-channel parameters respectively.
In the differential causal net for the c-th component of the parameter, we assign a link
that is directed from node j to node i if the estimated values (θb(i|j)1 )1≤q≤Q , 1 ≤ n ≤ N1
                                                                  nqc
in cases are significantly different from their counterparts in controls.
    In order to test for the significant differences between cases and controls, we treat
the case-control memberships and channel memberships as factors in the following
two-factor mixed-effects model

  b(i|j)k = δ q + α(k) + β (i|j) + c01 α(k) ⊙ β (i|j) + r (i|j)k ,
  θ                                                                         k = 0, 1;     q = 1, ..., Q,     (5)
    nq             q       q            q       q         nq




                                                                                                           10/40
where ⊙ denotes the component-wise multiplication and we write each estimated
parameter as the summation of a baseline, fixed-factors related to case-control
memberships and channels, and subject-specific random factors. Here, the significance
of the case-control factor implies that case-control memberships make a contribution to
the group differences while the significance of the channel-factor show that the group
difference should be accounted for by multiple channels. The significance of
random-effects (e.g., the difference of the variations across groups) implies that
subject-specific variations play a role in differencing the groups from each other.
                                                                     (1)     (2)
     To make the above model identifiable, we assume that αq + αq = 0,
P         (i|j)                                                P       (i|j)
   i̸=j β q      = 0, and c01 is the coefficient satisfying c01 q |βqc + 1| ̸= 0 and
     P       (i|j)
c01 q |αqc + 1| =      ̸ 0 . Under the assumption that the parameters for different subjects
are independent of each other, the expected Manhattan distances between the groups
and within the groups admit
                                                        (i|j)0  (i|j)1
                     X                          X
                           (i|j)1    (i|j)0
                   E     |θnqc    − θmqc    | =     E|r1qc − r1qc |,
                     q                                   q
                     X                                 X
                           (i|j)k    (i|j)k                      (i|j)k    (i|j)k
                 E       |θnqc    − θmqc    |     =           E|θnqc    − θmqc    |,    k = 0, 1.           (6)
                     q                                   q

Approximating the expectations in equation (6) by the U-statistics Lee (1990), we have
the following statistics: For 1 ≤ c ≤ 5, k = 0, 1, and 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ J,

         (i|j)                   2                X           X
                                                                       (i|j)k    (i|j)k
        σckk     =                                                   |θmqc    − θnqc    |,
                         Nk (Nk − 1)Q
                                            1≤m<n≤Nk 1≤q≤Q

         (i|j)              1               X                 X
                                                                      (i|j)0    (i|j)1
        σc01     =                                                  |θmqc    − θnqc    |,    1 ≤ q ≤ Q,
                         N0 N1 Q
                                     1≤m≤N0 ,1≤n≤N1 1≤q≤Q

which are the empirical versions of the within-group and between group average
distances. For 2 ≤ c ≤ 5 (estimable parameters), to test the above null hypothesis H0 ,
                                            (i|j)     (i|j)
we consider the test statistics F (i|j) = (F1 , ..., F5 )T with
                                                                   (i|j)
                                                  (N0 + N1 )σc01
                                     Fc(i|j) =        (i|j)          (i|j)
                                                                             .
                                                 N0 σc00 + N1 σc11

We permuted the case-control memberships M times with default value M = 4999. For
                                                   (i|j)
each permutation, we recomputed the value of Fc , obtaining M permuted F -values.
The permuted p-values pc is then defined by counting the proportion of the permuted
                                                      (i|j)
F-values that are less than the observed value of Fc . We also run a permuted F -test
for differences in the variances of the random factors of patients and controls. Similarly,
                                     (i|j)
we test the null hypothesis that βqc = 0 for all (i, j).

2.3    Identifying differential causal nets between preictal and
       ictal periods
Understanding differences of epileptic patients between the preictal period and ictal
period is crucial for gaining deeper insights into the mechanisms underlying epileptic
seizures. While most studies focus on the ictal states, examining the transition from the
preictal phase to the ictal phase can reveal early neural signatures that precede seizure
onset. Identifying such signatures are important not only for elucidating
pathophysiological dynamics of epilepsy but also for improving seizure prediction and
thus developing early intervention strategies.




                                                                                                          11/40
                                 (i|j)k     (ilj)k     (i|j)k       (i|j)k     (i|j)k      (i|j)k     (i|j)k
    For each of parameters in (Anq        /Bnq       , Anq      ∗ Cnq        , Anq      ∗ Knq       , v0nq )
                                (·)           (·)
and for each channel pair, let Πpre and Πon denote the matrices of estimates derived
                                                                               (·)
from the NccDCM in the preictal and ictal periods respectively. Column of Πpre and
  (·)
Πon stand for the estimators of different case-subjects indexed by 1 ≤ n ≤ N1 while rows
correspond to different time segments indexed by 1 ≤ q ≤ 6. We performed multiple
permutation-based Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for significant NccDCM changes from the
preictal period to the ictal period They are implemented in four steps as follows:

    • Compute the test statistics W = (W1 , W2 , . . . , WN1 )⊤ . For subject n, denote
                              (·)        (·)   (·,j)      (·,j)
      the n-th columns of Πpre and Πon as πpre and πon , respectively. Compute the
                          (·,n)    (·,n)
      paired differences πon − πpre . After removing zero differences, rank the
      absolute values of the remaining differences in ascending order, assigning average
      ranks in the case of ties. The statistic Wn is then obtained by summing the ranks
                                                                          (·,n)  (·,n)
      corresponding to positive differences, i.e., those instances where πon > πpre .
                                                                                           (·)
    • Pair-matched permutation procedure. For each column in Πpre , find the
                                (·)
      corresponding column in Πon . We randomly swap the corresponding entries in the
                             6
      two columns, yielding 2 distinct permutations. For each permutation α, we
                                                 (·),α     (·),α
      denote the resulted permuted matrices by Πpre and Πon . W α is reduced to the
      observed statistic W when α is an identity permutation. The procedure is
      implemented as follows.
    • Compute the empirical p-values. For the n-th subject, the empirical p-value
      is computed as

                                              #{Wnα ≥ Wn }
                           p(n) =                                  ,
                                      Total number of permutations
      where the numerator counts the number of permuted statistics at least as extreme
      as the observed Wn . This yields the individual p-value for each subject.
    • Combine the p-values using Fisher’s method. Combining these individual
      p-values using Fisher’s method, we have the combined test statistic
                                                        N1
                                                        X
                                      χ2Fisher = −2           ln p(n) .
                                                        n=1

      The above statistic follows a chi-square distribution with 2 × N1 degrees of
      freedom under the null hypothesis that there are no changes in the parameters
      from the preictal period to the ictal period. The overall significance can derived
      from the above chi-square distribution.


3     Results
We investigate the behavior of the proposed mode and evaluate the performance of the
proposed estimating method using simulated and real EEG data.

3.1    Differential causal nets between cases and controls
A healthy, balanced brain connectivity is critical for maintaining brain functions. In
contrast, an abnormal brain connectivity can change subject’s behavior by affecting
certain areas involved in seizure propagation. Epilepsy is a group of neurological




                                                                                                         12/40
disorders characterized by abnormal spontaneous brain activity, involving multiscale
changes in brain functional organizations. The system epilepsy hypothesis posits that
the enduring susceptibility to generate seizures in epilepsy is due to the specific
vulnerability of the brain system (Fisher and et al., 2005). Abnormal firing of neurons
causes defected local circuit function, leading to alterations of macroscale functional
activities during seizure propagation (Burman and Parrish, 2018). The virtual brain
model has demonstrated that a combination of a global shift in the brain’s dynamic
equilibrium and locally hyperexcitable network nodes provides a mechanistic
explanation for the epileptic brain during interictal resting state (Courtiol et al., 2020;
Yang et al., 2024). Interictal Epileptiform Discharges (IEDs) in routine EEG recordings
is crucial evidence of epilepsy in patients. OK et al. (2021) published a benchmark
dataset for detecting IED. However, it is not clear to what extent the IEDs affect
macroscale intrinsic dynamics and microcircuit organizations, that supports their
pathological relevance. Here, we fit the NccDCM to this dataset to identify defected
dynamic causal nets associated with the IED.

3.1.1   Description of case-control data
The above dataset contains EEG recordings in 18 EEG channels for 21 subjects who
underwent EEG tests for epilepsy. Figure 2 in the Appendix Sc, the Supplementary
Material shows a standard international 10 ∼ 20 system for the electrode placement on
the human scalp, used primarily in EEG. This system ensures standardized and
reproducible positioning of electrodes across subjects and recording sessions based on
precise anatomical landmarks. Longitudinal bipolar montage is used for channel
configuration for the EEG recording, and the considered channels are FP2F4, F4C4,
C4P4, P4O2, FP1F3, F3C3, C3P3, P3O1, FP2F8, F8T4, T4T6, T6O2, FP1F7, F7T3,
T3T5, T5O1, FZCZ, CZPZ, and BP3REF (18 EEG channels and 1 ECG channel). See
Table 1 in the Appendix Sc, the Supplementary Mateial for the brain regions which the
electrode-pairs cover. Among these 21 subjects, IED time series were identified in the
recordings of 11 subjects as confirmed by neurologists while the remaining 10 subjects
were free from IEDs. Furthermore, for each of 8 patients, we were able to define 6
segments of IED time series, each of length 20 seconds, which were respectively matched
by the segments of time series of 10 controls at the same time-periods. In the following
analysis, we focus on these 8 patients against 10 controls. An example of the IED time
series from the channel F4C4 of the control-subject H9 is displayed in Figure 12(a).

3.1.2   Subject-heterogeneity analysis
We began with a heterogeneity analysis for control-case groups using hierarchical
clustering. We took the C3P3 channel as an example. The subject’s EEG time series in
the C3P3 and other channels were extracted from the same time period across all
subjects. We calculated the feature vector of marginal mean, variance and the
autocorrelations at the first 50 lags for each subject’s EEG time series.
Subject-heterogeneity in the C3P3 and other channels was assessed through hierarchical
clustering of these feature vectors, where the Euclidean distance based average linkage
method was adopted to generate dendrograms. The results for the C3P3 and other
channels, displayed in Figure 3 and the Appendix Se, showed evidence of
subject-heterogeneity in the case and control groups. These findings gave us a rational
to fit the NccDCM individually for each subject to capture subject-specific dynamics.
This approach allowed us to make group-level inferences while accounting for individual
variability through a mixed-effects model.




                                                                                     13/40
                                                               Start with groups of
                                                                     subjects

                                                       Fitting NccDCMs to EEG data for case
                                                                and control subjects
                                                                                                 Embedding
                                                       Fitting estimated NccDCM parameters
                                                                   to mixed-effects

                                                       Parameter post-ANOVA in means and
                                                                    variance

                                                                                            No
                                                                   Significant?

                                                                             Yes

                                                           Add an edge to causal nets


                                              Causal       Calculate total uncertainty
                                               nets         explained by the models

                                                        Adjust multiple channel inputs to
                                                                   NccDCMs

                                                              Drop the non-significant
                                                                       edges




Figure 2. An example of the IED time series from the C3P3 channel of the patient P3
and the flowchart of the NccDCM analysis.




       Controls                            Cases
Figure 3. Dendrograms for clustering subjects based on the time series data derived
from the channel C3P3 for the control and case groups.




                                                                                                             14/40
3.1.3    Differential dynamic causal nets in means
For each pair of channels, we first fit ccDCMs to recorded patients’ IED time series and
their counterparts in controls respectively, obtaining the estimated values of parameters
in the ccDCMs. We then perform a post-analysis of variance on these estimated
parameters to reveal the IED-associated causal patterns in terms of channel
excitation-inhibition ratio of synaptic gain, the strength of within-channel connectivity,
the strength of between-channel connectivity and the contrasts of synaptic transmission
between cases and controls during seizure periods.
                               (i|j)k  (ilj)k (i|j)k   (i|j)k  (i|j)k  (i|j)k (i|j)k
    For each of parameters Anq /Bnq , Anq ∗ Cnq , Anq ∗ Knq , v0nq and
each pair of channels (i, j), we used the R software developed by Anderson (2017) to
perform post analysis of variance to test whether there is a significant difference
between case and control groups. The manhattan distance was used in these tests. To
control the False Discovery Rate (FDR), the resulting p-values were further adjusted via
the Benjamini-Hochberg method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Based on the
adjusted (1 − p)-values, we constructed the adjacency matrix to reflect the degree of
difference between the case and control groups. To facilitate the presentation, we
retained only the values of (1 − p) that are larger than 95%. The resulting differential
dynamic causal nets are displayed in Figure 4. In the nets, the directionality was
indicated by arrows from an input channel to an output channel. The value of (1 − p)
increased from 0.95 to 0.99 as colors are ranging from dark purple to yellow. From
Figure 4, we revealed the following causal nets:
        (i|j)k   (ilj)k
   • Anq /Bnq : In Figure 4(a), there were 6 channel pairs to be claimed to differ
     cases from controls significantly: P4O2→FP1F7, T6O2→FP1F7, T5O1→FP1F7,
     C3P3→F7T3, C4P4→T6O2, and T5O1→T6O2.
        (i|j)k    (i|j)k
   • Anq ∗ Cnq : In Figure 4 (b), there were 98 channel pairs to be found to have
     significant differences between cases and controls. Notably, these differences were
     most pronounced in channel pairs where prefrontal regions served as output
     channels, including FP1F7, FP1F3, FP2F8, FZCZ and FP2F4, corresponding to
     the left and right dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices. This finding
     highlighted the prominent role of these prefrontal areas in driving network-level
     alterations.
        (i|j)k    (i|j)k
   • Anq ∗ Knq : In Figure 4(c), 51 channel pairs of channels exhibited significant
     differences between cases and controls. These differences were predominantly
     observed in the frontal regions.
        (i|j)k
   • v0nq : In Figure 4(d), there were 121 channel pairs which showed significant
     differences between cases and controls. The most pronounced differences were in
     the prefrontal and central-temporal-parietal region, where FP1F7, FP1F3, C3P3,
     T3T5, P4O2 and T4T6 served as output channels.
                                    (i|j)k (ilj)k (i|j)k   (i|j)k (i|j)k   (i|j)k
    In summary, for the parameters Anq /Bnq , Anq ∗ Cnq , Anq ∗ Knq               and
 (i|j)k
v0nq , the most pronounced differences between the case and control groups were in
channel pairs with the output channels in the frontal regions. In particular, for
  (i|j)k  (i|j)k
Anq ∗ Knq , the majority of significant channel pairs in frontal channels. For the
            (i|j)k
parameter v0nq , significant differences between cases and controls were observed in
nearly whole brain. An altered excitation/inhibition (E/I) balance, often involving
decreased inhibition, has been identified as a robust biomarker in various
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and frontotemporal
dementia (FTD). Our analysis showed a mechanism that epilepsy shared with other




                                                                                   15/40
neurological diseases that changes in the inhibitory connections in the frontal cortex
disrupted normal circuit operations and brain network dynamics.




                      (i|j)k   (ilj)k                                           (i|j)k    (i|j)k
                 (a) Anq     /Bnq                                          (b) Anq     ∗ Cnq




                      (i|j)k    (i|j)k                                                (i|j)k
                 (d) Anq     ∗ Knq                                               (e) v0nq

Figure 4. Networks for significant parameters changes after the corrections for multiple
testing in the function of inhibitory connections (e.g., in the frontal cortex in psy-
                                                                   (i|j)k  (ilj)k (i|j)k
chosis) disrupt normal circuit operations and network dynamics. Anq /Bnq , Anq ∗
  (i|j)k  (i|j)k   (i|j)k      (i|j)k
Cnq , Anq ∗ Knq           and v0nq . Dashed lines stand for edges where the case mean is
smaller than the control mean, while solid lines represent edges where the case mean is
larger than the control mean.


3.1.4   Differential causal nets in variation
                                    (i|j)k   (ilj)k   (i|j)k   (i|j)k   (i|j)k     (i|j)k          (i|j)k
For each of parameters Anq /Bnq , Anq ∗ Cnq , Anq ∗ Knq , and v0nq , we
employed the betadisper and permutest functions in the R to conduct a test of
multivariate homogeneity of group dispersions, thereby assessing whether the groups
exhibited different variations across channels. As before, the distance matrix required in
the software was derived from the manhattan method and the resulting p-values were
adjusted for multiple testing. Based on the adjusted (1 − p)-values, we constructed the
adjacency matrix to reflect the degree of difference between the case and control groups.
We retained only the (1 − p) values exceeding 95% and otherwise set them to zeros. The
results were displayed in Figure 4. In the differential causal nets, the directionality from
an input channel to an output channel was indicated by arrows. As before, the value of
(1 − p) increased from 0.95 to 0.99 as colors were changed from dark purple to yellow.
The findings are summarized as follows:
        (i|j)k       (ilj)k
   • Anq         /Bnq         : From Figure 5(a), 14 channel pairs were identified as significantly




                                                                                                        16/40
        different between cases and controls. These differences were most pronounced in
        channel pairs with output channels in the prefrontal regions, including FP1F7,
        FP2F8 and FP1F3 in the left and right dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal
        cortices.
         (i|j)k   (i|j)k
   • Anq ∗ Cnq : From Figure 5(b), 9 channel pairs were found significantly
     different between cases and controls. These differences were predominantly
     observed in the frontal regions.
         (i|j)k   (i|j)k
   • Anq ∗ Knq : From Figure 5(c), 54 channel pairs exhibited significant
     differences between cases and controls. These differences were most located in
     channel pairs with output channels in the prefrontal regions. They included
     FP1F7, FP2F8, F4C4, F7T3, FZCZ, FP2F4 and FP1F3 in the left and right
     dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices.
         (i|j)k
   • v0nq : No significant differences were found between cases and controls for any
     channel pair of channels.
                                      (i|j)k   (ilj)k   (i|j)k   (i|j)k    (i|j)k   (i|j)k
   In summary, for the parameters Anq /Bnq , Anq ∗ Cnq          , and Anq ∗ Knq ,
the differences between cases and controls were most pronounced in channel pairs with
the output channels in the frontal cortices.

3.1.5     Post ANOVA tables for the NccDCM
We treated the fitting of the NccDCM to each subject as a transformation of its EEG
measurements into the values of the estimated network parameters, which inherited the
uncertainty in the original data. We used the adonis2 function in the R software to
perform post multivariate ANOVA on these values and to test the significance of
case-control and channels as two factors. The numerical results are displayed in Figure
6 and in Tables 2-5, the Appendix Sd, the Supplementary Material. The results
indicated that the identified dynamic causal nets were highly significant for each
parameter. The percentages of variations in the EEG data explained by the estimated
                                    (i|j)k (ilj)k   (i|j)k   (i|j)k    (i|j)k (i|j)k
dynamic causal nets, in terms of Anq /Bnq , Anq ∗ Cnq               , Anq ∗ Knq      and
 (i|j)k
v0nq were 12%, 22%, 38% and 28% respectively. Here, the factor case-control occupied
1.7% (p-value 0.0002), 11.4% (p-value 0.0002), 7.4% (p-value 0.0002) and 18.4%
(p-value 0.0002) respectively. The percentages of variations in the estimated parameters,
R2 values confirmed the significant heterogeneity of the network parameters across the
channels. For example, around 6% (p-value 0.035) of the variations in the estimated
excitation/inhibition ratios was due to the channel difference.

3.1.6     Lagged correlation analysis
To compare with lagged correlation analysis, we calculated lagged correlation
coefficients using the method in the Appendix Sb, the Supplementary Material. The
analysis revealed 31 channel pairs with p-values less than 0.05 in testing the difference
of lagged correlations between the control and case groups. See Figure 5(d) for the
display. The channel pairs (FP2F4, P4O2), (FP2F4, F3C3), (F4C4, FP1F7), (FP1F3,
F8T4), (F3C3, FP1F7), (F3C3, FZCZ), and (FP1F7, FZCZ) with p-values were smaller
than 0.005. Among them, channel pairs (FP2F4, F3C3), (F4C4, FP1F7), (FP1F3,
                                                          (i|j)k   (i|j)k
F8T4), and (F3C3, FP1F7) were also identified in the Anq ∗ Knq            based NccDCM
analysis. However, unlike the previous NccDCM analysis, there were no significant pairs
left at 5% after the Benjmini-Hockberg correction for multiple testing. This showed the
advantages of the NccDCM analysis over the conventional correlation analysis.




                                                                                    17/40
                  (i|j)k   (ilj)k                                  (i|j)k    (i|j)k
             (a) Anq     /Bnq                                 (b) Anq     ∗ Cnq




                 (i|j)k    (i|j)k
            (c) Anq     ∗ Knq                                (d) Lagged-correlations



Figure 5. Differential causal nets in variation for parameters after the adjustments
                             (i|j)k (ilj)k      (i|j)k    (i|j)k          (i|j)k  (i|j)k
for multiple testing: (a) Anq /Bnq , (b) Anq ∗ Cnq               and (c) Anq ∗ Knq        in
                                                                                      (i|j)k
case-control groups. No significant differential causal nets in variation found in v0nq .
By dashed (solid) lines, we meant the case mean of variation was smaller (larger) than
the control mean of variation. For a comaprison, the maximum lagged correlations-
based functional connectivity was also plotted in (d). There were no significant lagged
correlations left after the adjustments for multiple testing.




                                                                                       18/40
Figure 6. The percentages of uncertainty in the data which was explained by the
NccDCM-based mixed-effects models, R2 . See Anderson (2017) for the definition of R2 .


3.2     Differential causal nets between preictal and ictal periods
Description of pair-matched data According to the annotations provided by OK
et al. (2021), in the preictal periods, the epileptic subjects P1, P3 and P5∼P9 were
selected with six 20 seconds long preictal segments of time series identified. P2, P4 and
P10 were excluded from further analysis as there were no six 20 seconds long preictal
segments identified. Note that the preictal-ictal period dataset was period-matched for
each subject while the case-control dataset was not pair-matched.

Identified differential causal nets . We fitted a NccDCM to the EEG recordings
for each subject in the preictal period and the ictal period respectively, followed by the
pair-matched post Wilcoxon signed rank test for the period differences. The results
illustrated in Figure 7 suggest that, in patients with epilepsy, the NccDCM parameters
exhibited noticeable increases from the preictal period to the ictal period. These
changes were associated with seizure onset. However, there were no significant changes
in these parameters to be found from the ictal period to the preictal period.

3.3     Simulation studies
3.3.1   Properties of ccDCMs
As ccDCMs play a key role in shaping and influencing the structure and behavior of the
NccDCM, in the following we exam the behavior of ccDCM and evaluate the accuracy
of the proposed parameter estimation. For this purpose, suppressing channel and group
subscripts in the model (2), consider the following ccDCM with states
x(t) = (x0 (t), x1 (t), x2 (t), x3 (t), x4 (t), x5 (t)):

  dx0 (t)   =
            x3 (t)dt, dx1 (t) = x4 (t)dt, dx2 (t) = x5 (t)dt,
             AaS (x1 (t) − x2 (t)) − 2ax3 (t) − a2 x0 (t) dt,
                                                        
  dx3 (t)   =                                                                       (7)
                                                              2
                                                                    
  dx4 (t) = Aa {C2 S (C1 x0 (t)) + KS (y2 (t))} − 2ax4 (t) − a x1 (t) dt + Aadw(t),
  dx5 (t) = BbC4 S (C3 x0 (t)) − 2bx5 (t) − b2 x2 (t) dt,
                                                    




                                                                                    19/40
                 (i|j)k   (ilj)k                             (i|j)k    (i|j)k
            (a) Anq     /Bnq                            (b) Anq     ∗ Cnq




                 (i|j)k    (i|j)k                                  (i|j)k
            (d) Anq     ∗ Knq                                 (e) v0nq
                                     (i|j)k (ilj)k (i|j)k (i|j)k (i|j)k (i|j)k
Figure 7.   Networks for parameters Anq /Bnq , Anq ∗ Cnq , Anq ∗ Knq           and
 (i|j)k
v0nq




                                                                                20/40
with initial value x0 = (x0 (0), ..., x5 (0))T ∈ R6 and the input y2 (t) from the external
channel. We use the following Strang splitting method to generate the samples of x(t)
from the above model. See (Milstein and Tretyakov, 2003; Leimkuhler et al., 2016) for
more details. To this end, we first divide the system (7) into two subsystems below:
              [1]            [1]                 [1]          [1]           [1]      [1]
            dx0 (t)    =    x3 (t)dt,          dx1 (t) = x4 (t)dt,        dx2 (t) = x5 (t)dt,
              [1]                  [1]                 [1]
            dx3 (t)    = [−2ax3 (t) − a2 x0 (t)]dt,                                               (8)
                         h                      i
              [1]             [1]         [1]
            dx4 (t)    = −2ax4 (t) − a2 x1 (t) dt,
              [1]                  [1]                 [1]
            dx5 (t)    =    [−2bx5 (t) − b2 x2 (t)]dt,

and
                [2]                      [2]                  [2]
             dx0 (t)    =    0,
                           dx1 (t) = 0, dx2 (t) = 0,
                                              
               [2]           [2]         [2]
             dx3 (t) = AaS x1 (t) − x2 (t) dt,                                                    (9)
                         h                          i
               [2]                   [2]
             dx4 (t) = Aa C2 S C1 x0 (t) + KS (y2 (t)) dt + Aadw(t),
                                          
               [2]                 [2]
             dx5 (t) = BbC4 S C3 x0 (t) dt.

      [1]      [2]
Let φt and φt denote the exact flows of subsystems (8) and (9). Then, for x ∈ R6 ,
the so-called Strang splitting for system (7) can be written as
                                                 [1]         [2]    [1]
                             ψ∆t (x) = (φ∆t/2 ◦ φ∆t ◦ φ∆t/2 )(x).                                (10)

We independently generate the initial values for the states from the standard normal
distribution. We choose the input signal y2 (t) from the channel F4C4 of the healthy
subject H9 in the above EEG dataset which contains EEG measurements in the EEG
channels for 18 pediatric subjects. Using the discretisation step size of hsim = 1/256, we
obtain the approximate solution paths for subsystems (8) and (9) over time-length
T = 20 seconds. We then calculate the output signal y1 (t) = x1 (t) − x2 (t).

Parameter sensitivity analysis. In the following, taking the patient subject P3 as
an example, given an time series from the channel C3P3, fitting ccDCM to the output
time series from the chanel C4P4, we demonstrated that the excitation/inhibition ratio
A/B was identifiable while the individual A and B were not.
    To fit the NccDCM to the EEG data of subject P3, we calculated the loss functions
and optimised them to find the estimates (A,    [ A
                                              b A/B, \ ∗ C, A\ ∗ K, vb0 ). We plotted the
loss functions in (log A, A/B), fixing A ∗ C = A ∗ C, A ∗ K = A
                                                \                \ ∗ K and v0 = vb0 .. The
same procedure was also applied to the other pairs (log A, A ∗ C) and (log A, A ∗ K) .
The results displayed in Fig. 8 indicated that all these loss functions were flat with
respect to log A, implying that A was not identifiable. Our finding was consistent with
what was derived from the excitation/inhibition balance analysis for a canonical
microcircuit model (Hauke et al., 2025). This also gave rise to a rationale for the
reparameterisation of (A, B, C, K, v0 ) by θ = (A, A/B, A ∗ C, A ∗ K, v0 ) in the Section 2.

Bifurcation behavior of ccDCM. Under the above simulation setting, we first
demonstrate that the ccDCM does have bifurcation behavior when A/B, C, K, and v0
take values in some ranges. In the analysis, we change the value of one parameter with
the fixed other parameters to their typical values as specified in Table 1. Figures 12(a)
and 9 respectively display the input time series from the channel F4C4 of the healthy




                                                                                                21/40
          A/B                            A*C                            A*K
Figure 8. Surface plots of the loss function in (log(A), A/B), (log(A), A ∗ C) and
(log(A), A ∗ K): The loss function is flat in log(A).


subject H9 and the corresponding output time series under varying values of A/B, C,
K, and v0 .
   As shown in Figure 9(a), the output signal remains stable for A/B = 2/25 and
3.25/22. However, when A/B increases to 4/14, the output exhibits unstable oscillatory
behavior after approximately 15 seconds. Note that, as depicted in Figure 12(a), the
input signal reaches its maximum around this time. In the remaining panels of Figure 9,
no similar phenomenon has been observed for the other parameters. Furthermore, the
higher values of A/B, K, 1/C and v0 , the higher output signals will result.

3.3.2   Absolute relative error of loss-based estimation
Estimation of local nodes. In the following, we assessed the absolute relative error
of the proposed estimation for local nodes using a wide range of simulation studies.
    In the simulations, EEG signals from the FP2F4, F4C4, C4P4, P4O2, FP1F3, F3C3,
C3P3 and P3O1 channels were used as the input signal y2 (t), obtained from one
epileptic patient (P3) and healthy subject (H5). We repeatedly simulated y1 (t) from
equations (7) M = 48 times, giving 48 EEG segments of time series, each of a duration
of 20 seconds. We set the simulation step size hsim = 1/256 and the epoch length of 2 to
ensure that each epoch was short enough so that the Chen–Fliess series approximation
was valid. We evaluate the proposed method with respect to the absolute relative error
                     [ A
(ARE) for θb2:5 = (A/B,     \  ∗ C, A \∗ K, vb0 ) for each of M EEG segments, where
                        (0)     (0)         (0)
ARE(θb2:5 ) = |θb2:5 − θ2:5 |/|θ2:5 | with θ2:5 as the ground truth.
    The parameters in the Equation (7)) were set in the following three scenarios:
    Scenario I. A = 3.25, B = 22, C = 135, and K = 50 andv0 = 6.
    Scenario II. A = 4, B = 14, and the remaining parameters are kept the same as in
the Case I.
    Scenario III. A ∼ U (3, 6), B ∼ U (17.6, 30), C ∼ U (108, 160), K ∼ U (0, 50) and
v0 ∼ U (3.12, 9), where U (a, b) is a unifirm distribution over the interval [a, b].
    The simulation results, reported in Figures 10 and Table 2, showed that our
proposed estimation is promising in terms of ARE.

Joint estimation of nodes. In the following, we assessed the absolute relative error
of the proposed estimation for multiple nodes, where each node stands for a Jansen-Rit




                                                                                 22/40
(a) A/B                                                     (b) C




(c) K                                                        (d) v0




Figure 9. Given the input time series in Figure Output time-series for varying values
of (A, B) ∈ {(2, 15), (3.25, 22), (4, 14)}, C ∈ {68, 135, 675}, K ∈ {10, 50, 100} and v0 ∈
{2, 6, 12}. Output time-series exhibit bifurcation behavior only when A/B increases to
0.2857. The magnitude of output signal increases quickly in A/B, v0 and 1/C but slowly
in K.




Table 2. The median of ARE for estimating ccDCM in (7). The left block for taking
the EEG time series of the patient P3 as an input while the right block for taking the
time series of healthy subject H5 as an input.
                           P3                                                      H5
  Parameter   Scenario I    Scenario II   Scenario III   Parameter    Scenario I   Scenario II   Scenario III
     A/B         0.09          0.10           0.09          A/B          0.10         0.09           0.09
    A∗C          0.05          0.02           0.05         A∗C           0.05         0.03           0.05
      v0         0.06          0.08           0.06           v0          0.06         0.07           0.07
    A∗K          0.08          0.10           0.10         A∗K           0.11         0.14           0.10
      A          0.25          0.25           0.25           A           0.44         0.25           0.29




                                                                                                         23/40
  (a) Scenario I: P3                     (b) Scenario I: H5




  (c) Scenario II: P3                    (d) Scenario II: H5




  (e) Scenario III: P3                   (f) Scenario III: H5




Figure 10. Box-plots of ARE values of the estimated A, A/B, A ∗ C, v0 and A ∗ K
compared to the ground truths for scenarios I to III.




                                                                         24/40
neural mass model. The multiple nodes were coupled in a unidirectional ring structure,
allowing one node to influence another node. For each node, the corresponding
parameters were estimated independently using the proposed estimation method. The
simulation was repeated M = 100 times. The morel details of the setting for the case of
three nodes system can be found in the Appendix Sf, the Supplementary Material. The
corresponding ARE values, summarized in Figure 4 and Table 6 in the Appendix Sf, the
Supplementary Material, showed a good accuracy of the estimation. However, our
simulation experience (not shown here) indicated that the performance would be
deteriorated when there were multiple external inputs of similar magnitudes to a node.


4     Discussion and conclusions
Enabling data-driven composite network modelling at whole brain scales.
The question as to how large-scale dynamic causal patterns emerge from underlying
neuronal interactions is one that has attracted much interest in neurological disease
studies (Friston et al., 2019; Forrester et al., 2020; Pereira et al., 2021; Forrester et al.,
2024; Singh et al., 2025) and in statistics (Pokern et al., 2009; Ditlevsen et al., 2025).
The existing imaging studies often focused on a single subject study, either with models
for a small number of cortical columns or with models in a large scale but involving only
excitatory/inhibitory neuron populations or with models in a large scale but for
homogeneous brain regions, where all nodes in the network models are identical. In this
paper, to relax the above limitations, we have proposed a heterogeneous composite
network model, NccDCM, for groups of EEG scans respectively. In the NccDCM, each
node represents a local Jansen-Rit neural mass model for describing synaptic
interactions in excitatory/inhibitory and pyramidal neuron populations, which consists
of six-dimensional stochastic differential equations, while directed edges stand for
coupling/transmissions between these local neuron populations across different channels.
To account for individual subject-variability, we have introduced a mixed-effects model
for network parameters. We have developed the Chen-Fliess expansion-based
evolutionary optimisation algorithm for estimating NccDCMs. For easy of exposition,
we have adopted a pairwise screening strategy to estimate edges in the proposed
composite network. To identify dynamic causal nets that differs cases from controls, we
have carried out a post-analysis of variance for estimated parameters in cases and
controls. The work-flow is displayed in Figure 12. In the simulation study presented
here, we have revealed that the excitation and inhibition parameters are not
well-identifiable although their ratio is idetifiable. A similar phenomenon has been
found in conductance-based DCM by Hauke et al. (2025). This has given rise to the
approach of re-parametrisation of the original parameters that the new parameters,
including the excitation/inhibition balance ratio, are identifiable except the excitation
parameter. We have assessed the absolute relative errors of the model estimation,
demonstrating that the performance of the proposed estimates for the node and edge
parameters is relatively accurate.

Detecting and qualifying differential epileptic network. Epilepsy is considered
a network disease that affects the brain across multiple levels of spatial and temporal
scales. The epileptic network, however, is not static but evolves in time which requires
novel approaches for an in-depth characterization (Bröhl et al., 2024). The proposed
biophysics-informed network of neural mass models aims to detect and quantify such a
network. In particular, we have pursued a computational approach to elucidating the
difference of brain dynamic connectivity patterns called dynamic causal nets between
cases and controls or between the preictal period and the ictal period. We first fitted a
NccDCM to the EEG scan for each subject in the case and control groups respectively.




                                                                                       25/40
Following that, a mixed-effects model-based post-analysis of variance has been
conducted to contrast estimated case-control parameters. This has given rise to various
differential causal nets that differ the case-networks from the control-networks. The
same analysis has also been performed on the segments of time series in preictal and
ictal periods. We have found similar differential causal nets that differ the preictal
period from the ictal period. These nets are associated with epileptic seizures even after
the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing.
    It is widely recognised that EEG scans are inherently noisy with weak signals due to
the minuscule amplitude of brain-generated electrical activity recorded at the scalp and
the susceptibility to various sources of contamination. Only the synchronous firing of
millions of neurons produces a measurable signal at the scalp. Despite this, we have
demonstrated the advantage of the NccDCM analysis over the conventional temporal
correlation-based analysis in detecting links between regions. We have identified a list of
dynamic causal nets to characterise the spatial-temporal varying epileptic network.
These differential dynamic causal nets partially covered default mode network (DMN), a
collection of distributed and interconnected brain regions. DMN is typically suppressed
when the brain receives external stimuli; however, in the absence of attention to
external stimuli, the DMN switches to internally focused thought processes. Therefore,
the DMN activity can be obeserved in subject’s resting states. It follows from Menon
(2023) that the DMN nodes include posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and retrosplenial
cortex (RSC) in posterior medial parietal cortex; medial prefrontal cortex PFC (mPFC)
with its dorsomedial (dmPFC) and ventromedial (dmPFC) subdivisions; anterior
temporal cortex (ATC); middle temporal gyrus (MTG) in lateral temporal cortex;
medial temporal lobe (MTL); and angular gyrus (AG) in lateral parietal cortex;
thalamus (THAL) and caudate nucleus (CAU). Activities in PCC and RSC are
captured by electrodes FP2, P3, P4 and O2; AG is captured by P3, P4, T5 and T6;
PFC is captured by FP1. FP2, Fz, F3 and F4; ATC is captured by T3 and T4; MTG is
captured by T5 and T6; MTL is captured by F3, T4, T5, and T6. EEG channels do not
directly cover subcortical structures like the thalamus (THAL) and caudate nucleus
(CAU) because these deep brain regions do not produce sufficient electrical signals that
reach the scalp surface to be localised to a single channel. In Figures 4 and 5, the
identified dynamic causal nets differ cases from controls in the means and variations of
the estimated NccDCM parameters. These nets imply epilepsy-predisposed changes in
the DMNs and the THAL: (a) Edge changes in the excitatory/inhibitory synaptic ratio:
AG/PCC points to PFC, THAL points to AG/PCC. (b) Many edge changes in the local
structure parameters A ∗ C. (c) Changes in the transmission parameter A ∗ K: ATC
points to PFC; AG points to PFC. (d) Edge changes in v0 : AG points to PFC; ATC
points to PFC. Figures 7, compared the ictal period to the preictal period, yields many
dynamic causal nets that have been related to the estimated region-tramsmission
parameters. This finding implies that the changes in the region-transmission parameters
can be used for predicting onset of seizures.
    Our findings have provided a few epileptic network configurations than the DMN,
highlighting the contribution of dysfunctions in the DMN to epileptic activities and
cognitive behaviors in patients e.g., ( e.g., Jiang et al., 2022). As seizures are caused by
abnormal over-firing of the brain, it is expected that the excitation/inhibition
ratio/local connectivity/region connectivity-driven hyperactivity in the patients’ DMN
and thalamus/caudate nucleus should be associated with epilepsy.

Limitations. We view our present model as having the following limitations: 1)
algorithms for estimating the NccDCM and 2) the omission of subjects’ demographic
information. We have developed a marginal screening approach to estimating the
channel-wise connection parameters. Marginal screening is a method used to estimate




                                                                                     26/40
the coefficients of multiple external channel inputs by identifying the most significant
coefficients for each channel. This approach is particularly useful when a large number
of nodes involved. The method involves constructing a model that includes all external
channels and then selecting the most significant channels to include in the final model.
This method helps to avoid overfitting and ensures that the model is generalisable to
new data. However, the method is at the cost of estimation efficiency. The penalisation
regression or forward/backward variable selection can be explored in the future. The
second limitation potentially arise from the neglect of subjects’ demographic
information such as age and gender. A further work is needed to take age and gender as
additional predictors in each ccDCM.

Conclusions and future work. In summary, the proposed NccDCM is a novel and
useful tool for detecting disease-predisposed effective connectivity in case-control study
using EEG data. We have shown that the NccDCM can be used to characterise
epileptic brain network at the whole brain scale. This work can be extended to the
source-level, in particular, those sources in the deep brain, and to other neural mass
models in Friston et al. (2019).


Appendix A
Consider the following set of differential system of the form
                                          m
                                          X
            ż(t)     =    g0 (z(t)) +          gi (z(t))ui (t), z(0) = z0 ;   y(t) = h(z(t)),       (11)
                                          i=1

where each gi is an analytic vector field expressed in some neighborhood of z0 , and the
h is an analytic output function. Assume that (11) has a well defined solution z(t),
t ∈ [t0 , T + t0 ] for any given input ui (t), and y(t) = h(z(t)), t ∈ [t0 , T + t0 ] .

Lemma . The solution to equation (11) can be expressed as a Chen-Fliess series of
the form
                X        Z t Z τk     Z τ2                                              
     y(t) =                        ···      uik (τk ) · · · ui1 (τ1 )dτ1 · · · dτk−1 dτk
                    1≤i1 ,...,ik ≤m,k≥0    0      0       0
                                                     
                    × Lgi1 ◦ · · · ◦ Lgik h(z0 ) ,                                                   (12)

where Lgi1 ◦ · · · ◦ Lgik h(z0 ) is a Lie-derivative in the direction of the vector field. See
Lyons (1998).

 Chen-Fliess expansion of states in model (7)). For a small increment h and
t ∈ [t0 , t0 + h], truncating the Chen-Fliess expansion of x0 (t) and x2 (t) at the 3rd order,
we have
                                                                                              (t − t0 )2
                                                                                           
                                              νmax Aa            2
x0 (t) = x0 (t0 ) + x3 (t0 )(t − t0 ) +                      − a   x0 (t 0 ) − 2ax 3 (t 0 )
                                          1 + er(v0 −y(t0 ))                                      2
                 rνmax Aaer(v0 −y(t0 )) ẏ(t0 )
              +                          2        − a2 x3 (t0 )
                      1 + er(v0 −y(t0 ))
                                                                            (t − t0 )3
                                                                        
                        νmax Aa               2
              −2a                       −   a   x 0 (t 0 ) − 2ax 3 (t 0 )              + Op ((t − t0 )4(13)
                                                                                                        ),
                    1 + er(v0 −y(t0 )))                                         3!




                                                                                                   27/40
                                                                                                                 (t − t0 )2
                                                                                                              
                                                           νmax BbC4                               2
x2 (t)     =    x2 (t0 ) + x5 (t0 )(t − t0 ) +                                  − 2bx 5 (t 0 ) − b   x 2 (t 0 )
                                                       1 + er(v0 −C31 x0 (t0 ))                                      2
                    rνmax BbC3 C4 x3 (t0 )er(v0 −C31 x0 (t0 ))
                    
                +                                                  − b2 x5 (t0 )
                           (1 + er(v0 −C31 x0 (t0 )) )2
                                                                                  (t − t0 )3
                                                                              
                           νmax BbC4                               2
                 −2b                           − 2bx  5 (t 0 ) − b   x 2 (t 0 )              + Op ((t − t0 )4 ).(14)
                       1 + er(v0 −C3 x0 (t0 ))                                        3!
Similarly, given the input y (j) (t) from channel j, truncating the Chen-Fliess expansion
of x( t) at the 2nd order, we have
x1 (t)     =    x1 (t0 ) + x4 (t0 )(t − t0 )
                                                                                                     (t − t0 )2
                                                                                                  
                          νmax AaC2               νmax AaK             2
                +                            +                     − a   x 1 (t 0 ) − 2ax 4 (t 0 )
                     1 + er(v0 −C1 x0 (t0 ))               (j)
                                               1 + er(v0 −y (t0 ))                                       2
                       Z t
                +Aa        (t − s)dw̃s + op ((t − t0 )3 ),                                                 (15)
                          t0

It follows from equations (14) and (15) that the truncated Chen-Fliess expansion of y(t)
at the 2nd order can be written as
                                                                         Z t
            y(t) ≈ g(t|x−{3} (t0 ), y(t0 ), ẏ(t0 ), y (j) (t0 ), θ + Aa     (t − s)dw̃s , (16)
                                                                                        t0

where
         g(t|x−{3} (t0 ), y(t0 ), ẏ(t0 ), y (j) (t0 ), θ
            = y(t0 ) + ẏ(t0 )(t − t0 )
                                                                                                         (t − t0 )2
                                                                                                      
                       νmax AaC2                  νmax AaK                2
              +                              +                       −  a   x 1 (t 0 ) −   2ax 4 (t 0 )
                   1 + er(v0 −C1 x0 (t0 ))                  (j)
                                               1 + er(v0 −y (t0 ))                                           2
                                                                                       2
                                                                      
                       νmax BbC4                                         (t − t0 )
              −          r(v   −C  x  (t  ))
                                             − 2bx5 (t0 ) − b2 x2 (t0 )                  .
                   1+e       0   3  0   0                                       2
It is clear that g function depends on the initial values of states x−{3} (t0 ).
    Let
                                    νmax Aa
                  LA (t0 ) = (                      − a2 x0 (t0 ) − 2ax3 (t0 )
                                1 + er(v0 −y(t0 ))
                                   νmax BbC4
                  LB (t0 ) =                           − 2bx5 (t0 ) − b2 x2 (t0 ).
                               1 + er(v0 −C3 x0 (t0 ))
The 3rd-order Chen-Fliess series of x0 and x2 are
                        g0 (t|x0,3 (t0 ), y(t0 ), ẏ(t0 ))
                                                                   (t − t0 )2
                 =      x0 (t0 ) + x3 (t0 )(t − t0 ) + LA (t0 )
                                                                       2          !
                          rνmax Aaer(v0 −y(t0 )) ẏ(t0 )    2                       (t − t0 )3
                 +                               2      − a x3 (t0 ) − 2aLA (t0 )             ,                  (17)
                              1 + er(v0 −y(t0 ))                                        3!
and
                                                                            (t − t0 )2
 g2 (t|x−{1,4} (t0 ))          =   x2 (t0 ) + x5 (t0 )(t − t0 ) + LB (t0 )
                                                                                2
                                        rνmax BbC3 C4 x3 (t0 )er(v0 −C3 x0 (t0 ))
                                                                                                              
                                                                                        2
                                   +                                                 − b x5 (t0 ) − 2bLB (t0 )
                                                (1 + er(v0 −C3 x0 (t0 )) )2
                                     (t − t0 )3
                                   ×            ,
                                          3!
                                                                                                             (18)




                                                                                                                28/40
respectively.
   The 2nd-order Chen-Fliess series of x3 and x5 are

g3 (t|x{0,3} (t0 ), y(t0 ), ẏ(t0 ))   =   x3 (t0 ) + LA (t0 )(t − t0 )
                                                                                                             !
                                                 rνmax Aaer(v0 −y(t0 )) ẏ(t0 )
                                           +                            2      − a2 x3 (t0 ) − 2aLA (t0 )
                                                     1 + er(v0 −y(t0 ))
                                               (t − t0 )2
                                           ×              ,                                             (19)
                                                   2
and

g5 (t|x−{1,4} (t0 ))      =    x5 (t0 ) + LB (t0 )(t − t0 )
                                    rνmax BbC3 C4 x3 (t0 )er(v0 −C3 x0 (t0 ))
                                                                                                       
                                                                                  2
                               +                                              − b   x  (t
                                                                                      5 0 ) − 2bL  (t
                                                                                                  B 0 )
                                            (1 + er(v0 −C3 x0 (t0 )) )2
                                 (t − t0 )2
                               ×            ,
                                       2
                                                                                                      (20)

respectively.


Author Contributions
K.Y. conceptualisation, methodology, coding, data analysis, writing & editing of
original draf; G.G. conceptualisation, methodology, review & editing of original draft;
J.Z. conceptualisation, methodology, coding, data analysis, writing and editing of
original draft, supervision, funding acquisition and project administration.


Data and Code Availability
Codes to reproduce simulation results are in https://github.com/zhangjsib/NccDCM.
The EEG data on epilepsy is publicly available in OK et al. (2021).


Funding
The research of K.Y. and J.Z. is supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EPSRC) grant (EP/X038297/1)..


Declaration of Competing Interests
K.Y. and J.Z. have no competing interests. G.G. is an employee of Innovision IP Ltd
which provides commercial reports on individuals who may have had a head injury.


Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the University of Kent for letting us use the University HPC service.




                                                                                                     29/40
Supplementary material
Supplementary material in a pdf file includes additional information as follows.
   Appendix Sa: An introduction on the optimisation algorithm JADE.
   Appendix Sb: Lagged temporal correlation-based functional connectivity.
   Appendix Sc: EEG electrode allocation on the scalp.
   Appendix Sd: Post-ANOVA tables.
   Appendix Se: More results on subject-heterogeneity analysis.
   Appendix Sf: A simulation study on the estimation of three-nodes NccDCMs.
   The pdf file of the Supplementary Material is available in
https://github.com/zhangjsib/NccDCM.


Differential Dynamic Causal Nets: Model Construction,
Identification and Group Comparisons
  —Supplementary Material

Supporting information
In this supplementary material, we will present (a) the optimisation algorithm JADE;
(b) the lagged correlation-based functional connectivity;(c) the standard allocation of
the electrodes on the scalp; (d) post-ANOVA tables; (e) more results on
subject-heterogeneity analysis; (f) simulation study on the three-nodes system.




                                                                                 30/40
Appendix Sa: The optimisation algorithm JADE
To minimize the forward loss function, we employed a novel adaptive differential
evolution with optional external archive (JADE), a population-based global
optimization method proposed by Zhang and Sanderson (2009) and implemented in the
mealpy library. JADE is well suited for non-convex, multi-modal, and non-differentiable
optimization problems, as it does not rely on gradient information. Instead, it evolves a
population of candidate solutions through mutation, crossover, and selection, with the
aim of converging to the global minimum. The method is particularly advantageous in
our context because the objective function may be non-smooth or contain multiple local
minima due to the models nonlinear structure.
    As a metaheuristic optimization algorithm, the performance of JADE is sensitive to
the choice of hyperparameters, the initial population size and epoch size. These two
hyperparameters substantially affect both the convergence speed and the quality of the
final solution.
    Figure 11 illustrates how the value of the loss function evolves under different
settings of population size and iteration number in simulation studies, emphasizing the
role of these hyperparameters in shaping optimisation performance. It is evident that
almost algorithm JADE eventually converges to the same optimal value when the
number of iterations exceeds 150 for almost all population sizes. Intuitively, smaller
populations may force the algorithm to converge to a local minimum, limiting the
coverage of its search space. In contrast, larger populations generally facilitate faster
convergence owing to enhanced diversity, though further increases in population size
yield diminishing returns in performance while incurring substantially higher
computational costs. To strike a balance between convergence accuracy and
computational efficiency, we set the population size and the maximum number of
iterations to 15 and 250, respectively.




                   P3                                              H5
Figure 11. Trace plots of the objective function/loss function as the number of iterations
is increasing: L-SHAPE under different population sizes.



Appendix Sb: Lagged correlation-based functional
connectivity
We calculate the functional connectivity based on the lagged correlation coefficient. The
EEG signals used are extracted from the same time block across all subjects and from




                                                                                    31/40
all channels. For each subject, we compute pairwise cross-correlations between all
channel pairs across time lags ranging from −50 to +50. For each channel pair, the
maximum absolute correlation across these time lags is calculated, which allows us to
construct correlation matrices for all subjects.
    To normalise the correlation values, we apply Fisher’s z-transform, yielding the
matrices FPi (1 ≤ i ≤ n0 ) and FHj (1 ≤ j ≤ n1 ). For the control and case groups, the
                                                     Pn0                 Pn1
mean matrices are then computed as F P = n10 i=1          FPi , F H = n11 j=1  FHj . Then,
                                                                 1
                                                                   Pn0            2
the corresponding variance matrices are defined as V P = n0 i=1 FPi − F P and
           Pn1                   2      (0)   (1)  (0)      (1)
V H = n11 i=1
                               
                    FHi − F H . Let ρij , ρij , ϱij , and ϱij denote the (i, j)-th elements
of F P , F H , V P , and V H , respectively. For each channel pair, we compute the z-score as
                                             (0)    (1)
                                            ρij − ρij
                          fij = s                                    .
                                              (0)              (1)
                                    (n0 − 1) ϱij + (n1 − 1) ϱij
                                            n0 + n 1 − 2

Finally, only the values of |fij | greater than 0.5 are retained, and the results are based
on the absolute z-scores.
   In addition, we apply the following permutation test procedure to compute the
p-values.

  1. Permutation procedure. Let D = (H1 , . . . , H10 , P1 , P3 , P5 , . . . , P10 ) denote the
     combined dataset. To assess the statistical significance of the observed F = (fij ),
     we apply a permutation test: the labels “case” and “control” are randomly
     reassigned by permuting D. In each permutation, the first 10 subjects in the
     permuted dataset Dπ are designated as the control group and the remaining
                                                                                π
     subjects as the case group. Then, we recompute the test statistic fij        .
  2. Significance assessment. This permutation procedure is repeated 999 times.
                                                                                      π
     The observed statistic fij is included as part of the permutation distribution {fij }.
     The empirical p-value is then given by
                                              π
                                          #{|fij | ≥ |fij |}
                              p=                                ,
                                   Total number of permutations
      where the numerator counts the number of permuted statistics at least as extreme
      as the observed fij .


Appendix Sc: EEG electrode allocation on the scalp
Figures 12 and 3 show the positions of the electrodes and the brain regions that the
channels belong to.




                                                                                        32/40
Figure 12. The International 10-20 System for EEG Electrode Placement which was
adopted from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki.



Table 3. EEG electrode pairs and their brain regions
 Electrode pair    Position                              Brain Region
 FP2F4            Right frontopolar                      Right prefrontal cortex
 P4O2             Right parieto-occipital                Visual association
 F4C4             Right fronto-central                   Right frontal → motor cortex
 F3C3             Left fronto-central                    Left frontal → motor cortex
 C4P4             Right centro-parietal                  Right sensorimotor → parietal
 C3P3             Left centro-parietal                   Left sensorimotor → parietal
 FP1F3            Left frontopolar                       Left prefrontal cortex
 P3O1             Left parieto to occipital              Visual cortex
 FP2F8            Right frontopolar                      Anterior inferior frontal
 F8T4             Right inferior frontal                 Broca homolog
 T4T6             Right mid to posterior temporal        Auditory association
 T6O2             Right posterior temporal               Visual association
 FP1F7            Left frontopolar                       Anterior inferior frontal cortex
 F7T3             Left inferior frontal                  Broca area vicinity
 T3T5             Left mid to posterior temporal lobe    Auditory and language
 T5O1             Left posterior temporal to occipital   Visual association
 FZCZ             Medial frontal cortex                  Supplementary motor
 CZPZ             Central midline to parietal midline    Primary motor
 BP3REF           A reference electrode                  Not a cortical region




                                                                                33/40
Appendix Sd: Post-ANOVA tables
The results of the post ANOVA are summarised in Tables 4-7. The results indicated
that the identified dynamic causal nets were highly significant for each parameter.
                          (i|j)k     (ilj)k
Table 4. Post ANOVA: Anq           /Bnq       .
     Factor                          Df           Sum of Sq.             R2         F    p-value
     Case-control                     1               113.082         0.0167    93.150    0.0002
     Channels                       305               404.262         0.0596     1.092    0.0350
     Case-control × Channels        305               324.793         0.0479     0.877    0.9950
     Residual                      4896              5943.652         0.8759        —         —
     Total                         5507              6785.790         1.0000        —         —


                                      (i|j)k         (i|j)k
Table 5. Post ANOVA table for Anq                 ∗ Cnq       .
     Factor                          Df           Sum of Sq.            R2          F    p-value
     Case-control                     1            1.478 × 109        0.114    715.823    0.0002
     Channels                       305            6.871 × 108        0.053      1.091    0.0916
     Case-control × Channels        305            6.539 × 108        0.051      1.038    0.2796
     Residual                      4896           1.011 × 1010        0.782         —         —
     Total                         5507           1.293 × 1010        1.000         —         —


                                      (i|j)k          (i|j)k
Table 6. Post ANOVA table for Anq                 ∗ Knq
     Factor                          Df           Sum of Sq.            R2          F    p-value
                                                                  8
     Case-control                     1           3.161 × 10          0.074    580.963    0.0002
     Channels                       305           9.121 × 108         0.213      5.496    0.0002
     Case-control × Channels        305           3.957 × 108         0.092      2.384    0.0002
     Residual                      4896           2.664 × 109         0.621         —         —
     Total                         5507           4.288 × 109         1.000         —         —



Appendix Se: More results on subject-heterogeneity
analysis
We present results of subject-heterogeneity analysis for FP1F7, C4P4, T6O2, T5O1 and
P4O2.


Appendix Sf: A simulation study on the estimation of
three-nodes NccDCMs
In this appendix, we conducted a simulation study based on the NccDCM of three
nodes, where each node was represented by a Jansen–Rit neural mass model. The three
nodes were coupled in a unidirectional ring structure. The resulting three-node




                                                                                               34/40
                                                 (i|j)k
Table 7. Post multivariate ANOVA table for v0nq
    Factor                        Df    Sum of Sq.          R2          F    p-value
    Case-control                    1     3.639 × 105     0.184   1255.748    0.0002
    Channels                      305     1.226 × 105     0.062      1.387    0.0002
    Case-control × Channels       305     6.896 × 104     0.035      0.780    0.9998
    Residual                     4896     1.419 × 106     0.719         —         —
    Total                        5507     1.974 × 106     1.000         —         —




        Controls                               Cases
Figure 13. Dendrograms for the channels FP1F7, C4P4, T6O2, T5O1 and P4O2. The
left panel is for the control group (the left panel) while the right panel is for the case
group.




                                                                                    35/40
dynamical system was described by the following 18 stochastic differential equations:
             dx0 (t)   = x3 (t)dt, dx1 (t) = x4 (t)dt, dx2 (t) = x5 (t)dt,
                       = A1 aS1 (x1 (t) − x2 (t)) − 2ax3 (t) − a2 x0 (t) dt,
                                                                       
             dx3 (t)
             dx4 (t)   = [A1 a {C21 S1 (C11 x0 (t)) + K1 S1 (x13 (t) − x14 (t))}
                         −2ax4 (t) − a2 x1 (t) dt + A1 adw(t),
                                               

                       = B1 bC41 S1 (C31 x0 (t)) − 2bx5 (t) − b2 x2 (t) dt,
                                                                      
             dx5 (t)
             dx6 (t)   = x9 (t)dt, dx7 (t) = x10 (t)dt, dx8 (t) = x11 (t)dt,
                       = A2 aS2 (x7 (t) − x8 (t)) − 2ax9 (t) − a2 x6 (t) dt,
                                                                       
             dx9 (t)
            dx10 (t)   = [A2 a {C22 S2 (C12 x6 (t)) + K2 S2 (x1 (t) − x2 (t))}
                         −2ax10 (t) − a2 x7 (t) dt + A2 adw(t),
                                                

                       = B2 bC42 S2 (C32 x6 (t)) − 2bx11 (t) − b2 x8 (t) dt,
                                                                       
            dx11 (t)                                                                     (21)
            dx12 (t)   = x15 (t)dt, dx13 (t) = x16 (t)dt, dx14 (t) = x17 (t)dt,
                       = A3 aS3 (x13 (t) − x14 (t)) − 2ax15 (t) − a2 x12 (t) dt,
                                                                           
            dx15 (t)
            dx16 (t)   = [A3 a {C23 S3 (C13 x12 (t)) + K3 S3 (x7 (t) − x8 (t))}
                         −2ax16 (t) − a2 x13 (t) dt + A3 adw(t),
                                                 

                       = B3 bC43 S3 (C33 x12 (t)) − 2bx17 (t) − b2 x14 (t) dt,
                                                                          
            dx17 (t)
with the initial condition x0 = (x0 (0), . . . , x17 (0))⊤ ∈ R18 and
                                νmax
            Si (x(t)) =                            , t ∈ [0, T ], i = 1, 2, 3.
                        1 + exp(r(ν0i − x(t)))
The first three, the second three and the last three equations were corresponding to
nodes I, II and III respectively. For nodes I, II and III, we defined the observed outputs
as y1 (t) = x1 (t) − x2 (t), y2 (t) = x7 (t) − x8 (t), and y3 (t) = x13 (t) − x14 (t). Let
                              ⊤
Y (t) = y1 (t), y2 (t), y3 (t) denote the multi-node output process.
    The inter-channel coupling structure was specified as follows: the input to node I is
y3 (t), the input to node II is y1 (t), and the input to node III is y2 (t). Consequently, the
three-node system formed a directed cyclic network y3 (t) → y1 (t) → y2 (t) → y3 (t).
    As before, we employed the Strang splitting method to generate sample paths of
Y (t) from the coupled system (21). We independently generated the initial values of
the states from the standard normal distribution.
    The underlying values parameters in equation (21) were set as follows: A1 = 3.25,
B1 = 22, C1 = 135, K1 = 50, v01 = 6; A2 = 4, B2 = 14, C2 = 135, K2 = 70, v02 = 4;
A3 = 3, B3 = 15, C3 = 135, K3 = 50, and v03 = 5.
    For each channel, the corresponding parameters were estimated independently using
the proposed estimation method. The simulation was repeated M = 100 times. The
resulting corresp ARE values were summarized in Figure 14 and Table 8.
    As shown in Figure 14 and Table 8, the proposed method demonstrated a good
performance in the case where nodes are dynamically coupled each other.


References
Ableidinger, M., E. Buckwar, and H. Hinterleitner (2017). A stochastic version of the
 Jansen and Rit neural mass model: analysis and numerics. The Journal of
 Mathematical Neuroscience 7 (1), 1–35.
Aljalal, M., S. A. Aldosari, M. Molinas, and et al. (2022). Detection of Parkinson’s
  disease from EEG signals using discrete wavelet transform, different entropy
  measures, and machine learning techniques. Sci Rep 12, 22547.




                                                                                       36/40
Channel 1                    Channel 2                     Channel 3
Figure 14. Boxplots of ARE values for the estimated parameters Ai , (A/B)i , (A ∗ C)i ,
v0i , and (A ∗ K)i compared to the ground truth values for nodes I–III respectively.

Table 8. Median ARE values for parameter estimation in the three-channel system (21)
                  Parameter       Node I     Node II      Node III
                  A                   0.35        0.28          0.37
                  A/B                 0.14        0.05          0.10
                  A∗C                 0.05        0.05          0.17
                  A∗K                 0.14        0.18          0.09
                  v0                  0.07        0.09          0.05


Anderson, M. J. (2017). Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance
 (PERMANOVA), Chapter 1, pp. 1–15. John Wiley and Sons Ltd.
Arnold, L. (1974). Stochastic Differential Equations, Chapter 1-2, pp. 20.
  Wiley–Blackwell.
Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
  and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
  Series B 57, 289–300.
Bröhl, T., T. Rings, J. Pukropski, R. von Wrede, and K. Lehnertz (2024). The
  time-evolving epileptic brain network: concepts, definitions, accomplishments,
  perspectives. Frontiers in Network Physiology 3, 1338864.
Burman, R. J. and R. R. Parrish (2018). The widespread network effects of focal
  epilepsy. J. Neurosci. 38, 8107–8109.
Chen, C., R. N. Henson, K. E. Stephan, J. M. Kilner, and K. J. Friston (2009). Forward
  and backward connections in the brain: a DCM study of functional asymmetries.
 NeuroImage 45, 453–462.
Chen, K.-T. (1954). Iterated integrals and exponential homomorphisms. Proc. Lond.
 Math. Soc. 4, 502–512.
Choi, G. Y., W. K. Chang, M. Shim, N. Kim, J. H. Jang, W. S. Kim, H. J. Hwang, and
  N. J. Paik (2023). Electroencephalography network indices as biomarkers of upper
  limb impairment in chronic stroke. JoVE 197, 10.3791/64753.
Courtiol, J., M. Guye, F. Bartolomei, S. Petkoski, and V. K. Jirsa (2020). Dynamical
  mechanisms of interictal resting-state functional connectivity in epilepsy. J.
 Neurosci. 40, 5572–5588.
Ditlevsen, S., M. Tamborrino, and I. Tubikanec (2025). Network inference via
  approximate bayesian computation: Illustration on a stochastic multipopulation
  neural mass model. The Annals of Applied Statistics 19 (4), 3304 – 3329.




                                                                                   37/40
Duffy, F. H. and H. Als (2012). A stable pattern of EEG spectral coherence
 distinguishes children with autism from neuro-typical controls - a large case control
 study. BMC Medicine 10, 64.
Fisher, R. S. and et al. (2005). Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: definitions proposed by
  the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau for
  Epilepsy (IBE). Epilepsia 46, 470–472.
Fliess, M. (1981). Fonctionnelles causales non linéaires et indéterminées non
  commutatives. Bull. Soc. Math. France 109, 3–40.
Forrester, M., J. J. Crofts, S. Sotiropoulos, S. Coombes, and R. O’Dea (2020). The role
  of node dynamics in shaping emergent functional connectivity patterns in the brain.
  Netw Neurosci. 4, 467–483.
Forrester, M., S. Petros, O. Cattell, Y. Lai, R. D. O’Dea, S. Sotiropoulos, and et al.
  (2024). Whole brain functional connectivity: Insights from next generation neural
  mass modelling incorporating electrical synapses. PLoS Comput Biol 20, e1012647.
Friston, K., H. Brown, J. Siemerkus, and K. Stephan (2016). The dysconnection
  hypothesis. Schizophrenia Research 176 (2-3), 83–94.
Friston, K. J., L. Harrison, and W. Penny (2003). Dynamic causal modelling.
  NeuroImage 19, 1273–1302.
Friston, K. J., K. H. Preller, C. Mathys, H. Cagnan, J. Heinzle, A. Razi, and
  P. Zeidman (2019). Dynamic causal modelling revisited. NeuroImage 199, 730–744.
Ghassemkhani, K., K. S. Saroka, and B. T. Dotta (2025). Evaluating EEG complexity
 and spectral signatures in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia: evidence
 for rostrocaudal asymmetry. npj Aging 11, 50.
Grefkes, C., D. A. Nowak, S. B. Eickhoff, M. Dafotakis, J. Küst, H. Karbe, and G. R.
  Fink (2008). Cortical connectivity after subcortical stroke assessed with functional
  magnetic resonance imaging. Annals of Neurology 63, 236–246.
Grefkes, C., D. A. Nowak, L. E. Wang, M. Dafotakis, S. B. Eickhoff, and G. R. Fink
 (2010). Modulating cortical connectivity in stroke patients by rTMS assessed with
  fMRI and dynamic causal modeling. NeuroImage 50, 233–242.
Grimbert, F. and O. Faugeras (2006). Bifurcation analysis of jansen’s neural mass
  model. Neural Computation 18, 3052–3068.
Hauke, D. J., J. Rodriguez-Sanchez, H. Oloye, L. C. S. Berndt, D. Pinotsis, K. J.
  Friston, D. H. Mathalon, and R. A. Adams (2025). A canonical microcircuit for
  estimating excitation/inhibition (E/I) balance. bioRxiv .
Herz, D. M., S. B. Eickhoff, A. Løkkegaard, and H. Siebner (2014). Functional
  neuroimaging of motor control in Parkinson’s disease: a meta-analysis. Human Brain
 Mapping 35, 3227–3237.
Honey, C. J., R. Kötter, M. Breakspear, and O. Sporns (2007). Network structure of
  cerebral cortex shapes functional connectivity on multiple time scales. Proceedings of
 the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104 (24),
 10240–10245.
Jansen, B. H. and V. Rit (1995). Electroencephalogram and visual evoked potential
  generation in a mathematical model of coupled cortical columns. Biological
  Cybernetics 73 (4), 357–366.




                                                                                   38/40
Jiang, S., H. Li, L. Liu, D. Yao, and C. Luo (2022). Voxel-wise functional connectivity
  of the default mode network in epilepsies: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
  Curr Neuropharmacol. 20 (1), 254–266.
Kiebel, S. J., J. Daunizeau, and K. J. Friston (2008). A hierarchy of time-scales and the
  brain. PLoS Computational Biology 4, e1000209.
Kulik, S. D., L. Douw, E. van Dellen, M. Steenwijk, J. Guerts, C. Stam, A. Hillebrand,
 M. Schoonheim, and P.Tewarie (2023). Comparing individual and group-level
 simulated neurophysiological brain connectivity using the Jansen and Rit neural mass
 model. Network Neuroscience 7, 950–965.
Lee, A. J. (1990). U-Statistics, Chapter 1-2, pp. 320. CRC Press.
Leimkuhler, B., C. Matthews, and G. Stoltz (2016). The computation of averages from
  equilibrium and nonequilibrium Langevin molecular dynamics. IMA Journal of
  Numerical Analysis 36, 13–79.
Li, G., Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, D. Li, X. Liang, Y. Chen, Y. Cui, P. Yap, S. Qiu, H. Zhang,
  and D. Shen (2020). Large-scale dynamic causal modeling of major depressive
  disorder based on resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging. Human Brain
  Mapping 41 (4), 865–881.
Li, J., G. Green, S. J. Carr, P. Liu, and J. Zhang (2025). Bayesian inference general
  procedures for a single-subject test study. Neuroscience Informatics 5 (2), 100195.
Lyons, T. J. (1998). Differential equations driven by rough signals. Revista Matemática
  Iberoamericana 14 (2), 215–310.
Menon, V. (2023). 20 years of the default mode network: A review and synthesis.
 Neuron 111 (16), 2469–2487.
Milstein, G. N. and M. V. Tretyakov (2003). Quasi-symplectic methods for
 Langevin-type equations. IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis 23, 593–626.
Ogrim, G., J. Kropotov, and K. Hestad (2012). The quantitative EEG theta/beta ratio
 in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and normal controls: sensitivity, specificity,
 and behavioral correlates. Psychiatry Research 198, 482–488.
OK, F., R. R, and R. K. Ravindren (2021). Scalp EEG recordings of pediatric epilepsy
 patients: A dataset for automatic detection of interictal epileptiform discharges from
 routine EEG. Data in Brief 39, 107680.
Papadopoulou, M., M. Leite, P. van Mierlo, K. Vonck, L. Lemieux, K. Friston, and
  D. Marinazzo (2015). Tracking slow modulations in synaptic gain using dynamic
  causal modelling: Validation in epilepsy. NeuroImage 107, 117–126.
Park, B., S. Hong, S. Valk, and et al. (2021). Differences in subcortico-cortical
  interactions identified from connectome and microcircuit models in autism. Nat
 Commun 12, 2225.
Pereira, I., S. Frässle, J. Heinzle, D. Schöbi, C. T. Do, M. Gruber, and K. E. Stephan
  (2021). Conductance-based dynamic causal modeling: A mathematical review of its
  application to cross-power spectral densities. NeuroImage 245, 118662.
Pokern, Y., A. M. Stuart, and P. Wiberg (2009). Parameter estimation for partially
  observed hypoelliptic diffusions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B:
  Statistical Methodology 71 (1), 49–73.




                                                                                    39/40
Pyrzowski, J., M. Siemiński, A. Sarnowska, J. Jedrzejczak, and W. M. Nyka (2015).
  Interval analysis of interictal EEG: pathology of the alpha rhythm in focal epilepsy.
  Scientific Reports 5, 16230.

Rehme, A. K., G. R. Fink, D. Y. von Cramon, and C. Grefkes (2011). The role of the
  contralesional motor cortex for motor recovery in the early days after stroke assessed
  with longitudinal fMRI. Cereb Cortex 21, 756–768.
Rosch, R. E., P. R. Hunter, T. Baldeweg, K. J. Friston, and M. P. Meyer (2018).
  Calcium imaging and dynamic causal modelling reveal brain-wide changes in effective
  connectivity and synaptic dynamics during epileptic seizures. PLoS Comput Biol 14,
  e1006375.
Singh, M., T. Braver, M. Cole, and S. Ching (2025). Precision data-driven modeling of
  cortical dynamics reveals person-specific mechanisms underpinning brain
  electrophysiology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 122, e2409577121.

Sotero, R. C., N. J. Trujillo-Barreto, Y. Iturria-Medina, F. Carbonell, and J. C. Jimenez
  (2007). Realistically coupled neural mass models can generate EEG rhythms. Neural
  Computation 19, 478–512.
van Es, M. W. J., C. Higgins, C. Gohil, A. J. Quinn, D. Vidaurre, and M. W. Woolrich
  (2025). Large-scale cortical functional networks are organized in structured cycles.
  Nat Neurosci. 28, 2118–2128.
Wendling, F., E. Koksal-Ersoz, M. Al-Harrach, M. Yochum, I. Merlet, G. Ruffini,
 F. Bartolomei, and P. Benquet (2024). Multiscale neuro-inspired models for
 interpretation of EEG signals in patients with epilepsy. Clinical Neurophysiology 161,
 198–210.

Yang, S., Y. Zhou, C. Peng, and et al. (2024). Macroscale intrinsic dynamics are
  associated with microcircuit function in focal and generalized epilepsies. Commun
  Biol 7, 145.
Zhang, J. and G. Green (2025). Detecting mild traumatic brain injury with MEG scan
  data: One-vs-K-sample tests. Imaging Neuroscience 3, IMAG.a.137.
Zhang, J. and A. Sanderson (2009). JADE: Adaptive Differential Evolution with
  Optional External Archive. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 13,
  945–958.
Özbek, Y., E. Fide, and G. G. Yener (2015). Resting-state EEG alpha/theta power
   ratio discriminates early-onset Alzheimer’s disease from healthy controls. clinical
   neurophysiology : official journal of the international federation of clinical
   neurophysiology. Clinical Neurophysiology : Official Journal of the International
  Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology 132, 2019–2031.




                                                                                   40/40
