                                             DeepNuParc: A Novel Deep Clustering Framework for
                                             Fine-scale Parcellation of Brain Nuclei Using Diffusion
                                                                MRI Tractography

                                             Haolin Hea,b , Ce Zhua , Le Zhanga , Yipeng Liua , Xiao Xua , Yuqian Chenc , Leo
                                          Zekelmanc , Jarrett Rushmored , Yogesh Rathic , Nikos Makrisc , Lauren J. O’Donnellc,∗,
                                                                              Fan Zhanga,∗
arXiv:2503.07263v2 [eess.IV] 2 Sep 2025




                                                         a University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
                                                               b The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
                                                                           c Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA
                                                                               d Boston University, Boston, USA




                                          Abstract

                                          Brain nuclei are clusters of anatomically distinct neurons that serve as important hubs
                                          for processing and relaying information in various neural circuits. Fine-scale parcella-
                                          tion of the brain nuclei is vital for a comprehensive understanding of their anatomico-
                                          functional correlations. Diffusion MRI tractography is an advanced imaging technique
                                          that can estimate the brain’s white matter structural connectivity to potentially reveal
                                          the topography of the nuclei of interest for studying their subdivisions. In this work,
                                          we present a deep clustering pipeline, namely DeepNuParc, to perform automated,
                                          fine-scale parcellation of brain nuclei using diffusion MRI tractography. First, we in-
                                          corporate a newly proposed deep learning approach to enable accurate segmentation of
                                          the nuclei of interest directly on the dMRI data. Next, we design a novel streamline
                                          clustering-based structural connectivity feature for a robust representation of voxels
                                          within the nuclei. Finally, we improve the popular joint dimensionality reduction and
                                          k-means clustering approach to enable nuclei parcellation at a finer scale. We demon-
                                          strate DeepNuParc on two important brain structures, i.e. the amygdala and the tha-
                                          lamus, that are known to have multiple anatomically and functionally distinct nucleus
                                          subdivisions. Experimental results show that DeepNuParc enables consistent parcel-

                                               ∗ Lauren J. O’Donnell and Fan Zhang contributed equally as co-senior authors. The corresponding author

                                          is Fan Zhang (fan.zhang@uestc.edu.cn).



                                          Preprint submitted to NeuroImage                                                        September 3, 2025
lation of the nuclei into multiple parcels across multiple subjects and achieves good
correspondence with the widely used coarse-scale atlases. Our code is available at
https://github.com/HarlandZZC/deep_nuclei_parcellation.
Keywords:
Brain nuclei, parcellation, diffusion MRI, tractography, deep clustering


1. Introduction

   Brain nuclei are clusters of anatomically distinct neurons that serve as important
hubs for processing and relaying information in various neural circuits [1, 2]. For ex-
ample, the amygdala is a collection of nuclei that is responsible for human emotional
processing [3], and the thalamus contains various nuclei that act as relay stations for
sensory information headed to the cerebral cortex [4]. Anatomically, these brain nu-
cleus structures have a complex internal composition with several types of neurons
arranged into multiple subdivisions, and each subdivision exhibits unique functional
roles. They are interconnected with other brain regions through white matter (WM)
pathways that allow for the integration and coordination of various brain functions.
Many studies have shown that the distinct functional specificity of the subdivisions of
these brain nucleus structures plays an important role in the progression and diagnosis
of related brain diseases [5–8]. For instance, abnormalities in specific amygdala sub-
divisions have been linked to brain disorders such as autism, Alzheimer’s disease, and
anxiety [6]. Therefore, parcellation of brain nuclei is of great interest for understanding
their neuroanatomical features and can potentially assist in the diagnosis and therapy
of brain diseases.
   Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used technique to study brain nu-
cleus structures and their subdivisions. The most commonly used is the structural MRI
(sMRI), e.g., T1-weighted images. In the past few decades, a large number of stud-
ies have used sMRI to investigate the anatomy of various brain nuclei and largely en-
hanced our understanding of their overall structure and function [9–11]. More recently,
to enable investigation of the detailed structure and subdivisions, studies have utilized
advanced high-resolution sMRI scans for improved imaging of the brain nuclei [12–


                                            2
16]. For instance, nine amygdala nucleus subdivisions are delineated using postmortem
specimens at high resolution (100–150 µm) on a 7T scanner [12]. However, one short-
coming of sMRI is that it does not provide information about the inter-regional con-
nectivity of the brain. As a result, only using sMRI is insufficient in assessing how the
nucleus structures of interest interact with other brain regions — information critical in
assisting in identifying anatomically distinct subdivisions within the nuclei.
   Moving beyond the conventional sMRI data, there is an increasing interest in de-
veloping connectivity-based nucleus parcellation methods using more advanced MRI
techniques [17, 18]. One category of methods utilizes functional MRI (fMRI) to assess
the functional connectivity between various brain regions [19–22]. These methods par-
cellate the nucleus structures of interest into subdivisions with similar blood-oxygen-
level-dependent (BOLD) signals, based on the assumption that voxels exhibiting sim-
ilar activity share the same functional role. For example, one recent fMRI study [20]
subdivides the amygdala into two subdivisions and shows good correspondence with
the widely used parcellation atlas that includes the laterobasal (LB), the centromedial
(CM), and the superficial (SF) subdivisions [23]. Another category of work attempts to
use diffusion MRI (dMRI) for brain parcellation based on WM structural connectivity
[24–27], which aligns with the scope of our study. dMRI is an advanced MR technique
that uniquely enables in vivo reconstruction of the brain’s WM connections via a com-
putational process called tractography [28, 29]. Many methods have been proposed for
nucleus parcellation using dMRI tractography, under the assumption that voxels con-
nected to the same brain regions share the same WM structural connectivity [24–27].
That is to say, voxels crossed by fibers with similar white matter anatomy or pathway
trajectories typically belong to the same anatomical subdivision. Such methods have
demonstrated successful applications in studying brain diseases such as schizophrenia
[30] and Parkinson’s disease [31, 32].
   Despite the increasing popularity of connectivity-based nucleus parcellation, ef-
fective and fine-scale parcellation using dMRI tractography remains a challenge. In
general, the overall process for parcellating the nucleus structure of interest (e.g., the
amygdala) into multiple subdivisions includes the following major steps: 1) segmenta-
tion, that is identifying the entire structure from the dMRI data, 2) connectivity feature


                                            3
extraction, that is computing imaging features that are informative to differentiate vox-
els belonging to different subdivisions, and 3) nucleus voxel clustering, that is group-
ing the voxels based on the extracted connectivity features. There are several technical
challenges during this process. The first is how to accurately segment the nucleus struc-
ture of interest in dMRI data. The typical approach involves segmenting structures on
higher-resolution sMRI with superior tissue contrast, registering to dMRI space, and
optionally refining the segmentation using dMRI-derived parameters to minimize par-
tial volume contamination [33]. However, the registration is challenging due to image
distortions and low resolution of dMRI data, often resulting in segmentation errors
between the nucleus of interest and its neighboring regions [34]. The second chal-
lenge is how to come up with an informative connectivity feature representation that
can discriminatively describe the subdivisions of the nucleus structure. Existing work
usually represents voxels using local fiber orientation distribution [24] or connectivity
probability derived from probabilistic tractography [25, 26]. However, these methods
do not consider the actual trajectory of the WM fibers that reflect the underlying WM
anatomy. The third challenge is how to effectively identify the subregions of the nu-
cleus structure of interest based on their connectivity features. This has been done
by using traditional machine learning clustering approaches, e.g., k-means applied to
custom-designed voxel features [24, 25, 33], to identify voxels with similar connectiv-
ity patterns, while recent advances in deep clustering have shown superior performance
over traditional methods in dMRI-related parcellation tasks [35, 36].
    In this paper, we propose a novel deep-learning method, namely DeepNuParc, for
automated, fine-scale nucleus parcellation using dMRI tractography. We demonstrate
our method on two important brain nucleus structures, i.e. the amygdala and the tha-
lamus, that are known to have multiple anatomically and functionally distinct nucleus
subdivisions. Fine-scale parcellation of these two nucleus structures is highly impor-
tant in clinical and scientific applications, e.g., identifying targets for deep brain stim-
ulation (DBS) in the treatment of neurodegenerative conditions. Overall, DeepNuParc
includes three major technical contributions. First, we segment the nucleus structure
of interest directly from dMRI data to avoid any potential segmentation errors caused
by inter-modality registration between sMRI and dMRI data. Second, we design a


                                             4
novel streamline clustering-based connectivity feature to enable robust representation
of the voxels within the segmented nucleus structure of interest. Third, we propose
a deep clustering network that extends the popular joint dimensionality reduction and
k-means clustering approach [37] to group voxels with similar connectivity for nu-
cleus parcellation at a finer scale. We perform experiments on the Human Connectome
Young Healthy Adult (HCP-YA) dataset [38]. Experimental results show that DeepNu-
Parc enables consistent nucleus structure parcellation into multiple subdivisions across
multiple subjects and achieves good correspondence with the widely used coarse-scale
atlases. This investigation extends our previous conference publication [39] to include
an improved neural network training framework, additional experiments on a broader
spectrum of nuclei (including the thalamus and the amygdala), a more comprehensive
performance assessment, and an improved method description with in-depth technical
details.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the experimen-
tal datasets, the proposed framework, and the model training and testing. Section 3
presents the experimental setup and results on high-quality dMRI data. Finally, the
discussion, conclusions, and future work are given in Section 4.




                         Figure 1: Overall framework of DeepNuParc.




                                             5
2. Methods

    Figure 1 gives an overview of our proposed DeepNuParc method, including (1)
dMRI data preprocessing and nucleus structure segmentation (Section 2.1), (2) voxel-
wise connectivity feature representation that leverages dMRI tractography streamline
clustering (Section 2.2.1) and streamline cluster dilation and smoothing (Section 2.2.2),
and (3) fine-scale nucleus parcellation using the proposed adaptive k-means-friendly
autoencoder clustering method.

2.1. Dataset, Preprocessing, and Nucleus Structure Segmentation

    We utilize dMRI data from 100 young healthy adults (29.1±3.7 years; 54 females
and 46 males) from the Human Connectome Project (HCP) [38]. The acquisition pa-
rameters are TE=89.5ms, TR=5520ms, and voxel size=1.25×1.25×1.25 mm3 , 18 base-
line images, and 270 diffusion-weighted images distributed evenly at b=1000/2000/3000
s/mm2 . The provided dMRI data in HCP has been processed following the HCP min-
imum processing pipeline, including brain masking, motion correction, eddy current
correction, EPI distortion correction, and rigid registration to the MNI space [40]. In
our experiments, 80 subjects are used for model training and 20 subjects are used for
testing.
    Segmentation of the entire nucleus structure (i.e., the amygdala and the thalamus)
is performed using our recently proposed DDParcel method [34] that performs the
FreeSurfer Desikan-Killiany (DK) parcellation [41] including the nuclei of interest.
Unlike existing methods that perform segmentation on T1-weighted data and then reg-
ister to dMRI space, DDParcel enables segmentation directly from the dMRI data to
avoid potential errors due to inter-modality registration. In this way, we can obtain
an accurate nucleus structure segmentation to benefit the following connectivity-based
parcellation into multiple subdivisions. In brief, the input of DDParcel is the subject-
specific dMRI-derived parameter maps including fractional anisotropy, mean diffusiv-
ity, and diffusion tensor eigenvalues. A pre-trained segmentation model provided in
DDParcel with 101 anatomical regions (including both cortical and subcortical parcel-
lations) corresponding to the DK parcellation is applied to the input parameter maps.



                                           6
One benefit of DDParcel is the use of a multi-level fusion network to leverage the com-
plementary information from the multiple dMRI-derived parameters for accurate brain
segmentation in dMRI space.


2.2. Voxel-wise Connectivity Feature Representation

    After segmentation of the entire nucleus structure of interest, we compute a struc-
tural connectivity feature representation of each voxel within the structure based on
its WM connections. Unlike existing work that represents voxels using local fiber
orientation distributions [24] or connectivity probabilities derived from probabilistic
tractography [25, 26], we propose to use deterministic tractography data parcellated
into streamline clusters for a robust connectivity representation, as deterministic trac-
tography can provide highly geometrically plausible trajectory information and ensures
the effectiveness of our subsequent streamline cluster dilation and smoothing processes
(Section 2.2.2).


2.2.1. Nucleus Tractography and Streamline Clustering
    We first compute tractography to extract all WM streamlines connecting to the nu-
cleus structure of interest, which is referred to as “nucleus tractography” in our study.
To do so, we perform whole-brain tractography, followed by selecting all streamlines
connected to the nucleus structure. We use a dual-tensor Unscented Kalman Filter
(UKF) method [42] provided in the SlicerDMRI software [43, 44] to compute the
whole-brain tractography. We choose the UKF method because it has been demon-
strated to be highly robust for successful fiber tracking across the lifespan [45] and
highly sensitive, especially in the presence of crossing fibers in WM structures [46–
49]. During the streamline filtering process, to avoid missing any potential streamlines
that terminate before reaching the nucleus structure, we dilate the nucleus segmentation
and use the dilated region as an inclusion mask to retain streamlines that pass through
the nucleus from the whole-brain tractography.
    Next, we perform streamline clustering to subdivide the nucleus tractography into
multiple distinct fiber bundles. Due to the large number of streamlines in nucleus
tractography, it is difficult to build a feature representation directly for each voxel using


                                             7
individual streamlines. Therefore, we perform streamline clustering (also known as
fiber clustering) to group white matter streamlines based on their spatial and geometric
properties. We use our well-established WhiteMatterAnalysis (WMA) pipeline [45,
50, 51] for groupwise streamline clustering simultaneously across multiple subjects. In
previous work, we have shown successful application of this method in whole-brain
and region-specific tractography clustering analyses [45, 49, 52]. In our study, for each
subject, we subdivide the nucleus tractography into K streamline clusters (see Section
3.2 for parameter setting of K).




                 Figure 2: Illustration of the streamline cluster dilation and smoothing.


2.2.2. Feature Extraction via Streamline Cluster Dilation and Smoothing
    We then extract a feature representation for each voxel within the segmented nu-
cleus structure per subject based on the obtained streamline clusters. Based on our
previous work for dentate parcellation [36], for each voxel i, we construct a feature
representation Fi = (vi j | j = 1, . . . , K), where vi j is set to 1 if streamline cluster j in-
tersects with i. However, this representation can be ineffective for brain structures like
the amygdala and the thalamus which have highly complex WM connections. First,
there are voxels within the nucleus not directly intersecting with any streamline clus-
ters (referred to as empty voxels), resulting in Fi being a zero vector. Second, this
representation neglects the spatial relationship between the voxels and the clusters;
that is to say, vi j is 0 no matter how far it is between i and j. To resolve these, we



                                                    8
propose two novel additions for an improved feature representation.
    First, to address empty voxels, we design a streamline cluster dilation process, as
illustrated in Figure 2.a. For each empty voxel i, we set vi j = 1 if any adjacent voxel of
i intersects with cluster j. This process largely reduces the sparsity effect of streamlines
within a cluster, which results in voxels that are generally traversed by the streamline
cluster but do not intersect with any individual streamlines.
    Second, to provide information about spatial relationships, we design a streamline
cluster smoothing process, as illustrated in Figure 2.b. For each voxel i with vi j = 0, we
set vi j = G(di j ), where di j is the smallest distance between i and all voxels intersecting
with cluster j, and G(d) is computed via a Gaussian kernel with mean = 0 and σ =
1. After this, each element in Fi provides information about the spatial relationship
between the voxel and the streamline clusters, while ensuring no empty elements with
a zero feature representation.


2.3. Fine-Scale Nucleus Parcellation via Deep Clustering

    We parcellate the nucleus structure of interest by clustering the voxels based on
their connectivity features. To do this, we design a dense autoencoder network that
extends the deep clustering method in [37] for an improved fine-scale parcellation.
The overall network architecture is shown in Figure 2, including three major parts:
(1) encoder to extract a low-dimensional latent feature for each voxel based on its
input connectivity feature, (2) decoder to reconstruct the original input from the low-
dimensional feature, and (3) k-means to cluster voxels belonging to the segmented
nucleus structure, thereby achieving nucleus parcellation into multiple parcels.




                                              9
     Figure 3: Overview of the proposed adaptive k-means-friendly autoencoder clustering network.


2.3.1. Input Augmentation and Dense Autoencoder Framework
   Compared to the original network proposed in [37], we first include an input aug-
mentation process to address the specialty of the input feature. Specifically, the original
input is a 1D feature representation, where each element corresponds to one stream-
line cluster and its neighboring elements are two other random streamline clusters.
A straightforward way is to apply a 1D convolution network, but it can only use the
randomly assigned neighborhood information. The relationships between individual
elements within each one-dimensional feature vector are critically important. For in-
stance, when two elements are both ‘1’, it indicates that the nucleus of interest is simul-
taneously traversed by two streamline clusters. However, due to the limited receptive
field, 1D convolution struggles to capture each element equally. Relationships between
closely spaced elements are more readily captured by 1D convolution, while relation-
ships between elements that are further apart are more challenging to capture.
   Hence, similar to our previous work that builds a 2D representation from a 1D vec-
tor for tractography parcellation [53], we perform an input augmentation by shuffling
the elements in the feature vector sequentially and concatenating them into a 2D input
matrix. In our study, we cyclically shifted the feature vector K (the number of stream-
line clusters) times, generating a feature matrix with a size of K × K. Thus, we can
apply a 2D convolution with a larger receptive field to representation learning. Addi-
tionally, thanks to the cyclic arrangement of the elements, the 2D convolutional kernels


                                                 10
can convolve the relationships between all elements in a uniform and equitable manner.
    The CNN component consists of a 5 × 5 convolutional layer followed by batch nor-
malization (BN) and 2 × 2 max pooling (as shown by the orange dashed arrows), which
performs feature extraction and spatial dimension reduction at each encoder level. Fur-
thermore, we also improve the original simple convolution network with a DenseNet
structure [54] in the encoder to better use the input feature, as illustrated with the green
dashed arrows in Figure 3. Specifically, for the encoder, we incorporate a dense struc-
ture. The output of each layer, after being downsampled, is concatenated with the
output of the subsequent layer. This architecture, combining dense and convolutional
layers, can enable the encoder to better utilize the information from each convolutional
layer, thereby capturing details from the feature representation.


2.3.2. Adaptive K-Means-Friendly Training Mechanism
    One critical challenge for the deep clustering model is to ensure that the learned
latent features from pre-trained autoencoders can be adapted according to the down-
stream clustering task. While the joint dimensionality reduction and k-means cluster-
ing approach in [37] has largely addressed this, we find it ineffective when a fine-scale
clustering is performed, generating unbalanced clustering results where a subset of
clusters is empty or with a small number of voxels. Therefore, we propose an im-
proved adaptive training mechanism to avoid this issue, as follows.
    We first pre-train the autoencoder using a mean squared error (MSE) loss to learn
a latent feature per voxel. Then, we simultaneously train the autoencoder and the k-
means clustering based on the latent feature computed from the pre-training stage.
This allows a fine-tuning of the autoencoder together with the clustering. During each
training batch, we check if there are any clusters with only a small number of voxels
(which is empirically set to be fewer than 1/80 of the batch size), and if so, replace
these clusters’ centroids with the mean of the others.
    Below is the loss function including one component for the autoencoder and one
for cluster centroid assignment:

                   Losstrain = λMSE(d(e(xi )), xi ) + β∥e(xi ) − mk←i ∥22 ,



                                             11
   where e(·) is the encoder, d(·) is the decoder, xi is the input feature, and mk←i is
the cluster centroid to which xi belongs. The weighting parameter λ is set to be 15000
based on a testing range from 5000 to 20000, and β is set to be 0.5 based on a testing
range from 0.1 to 10.


3. Experiments and Results

   To verify the reliability and generalizability of our method, we perform the follow-
ing experimental evaluations on both the amygdala and thalamus. First, we assess the
influence of major parameters involved in our method (Section 3.2). Second, we com-
pare with several baseline methods to demonstrate the performance of each component
in our proposed method (Section 3.3). Third, we compare our parcellation results with
existing atlases to assess if our parcellation corresponds to the known anatomy of the
nucleus structures of interest.

3.1. Evaluation Metrics

   For exploratory parcellation tasks based on tractography in medical imaging, it is
crucial to use appropriate metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of parcellation. In our
study, we use a total of four metrics, which are as follows: 1) Spatial Continuity (SC)
is the percentage of voxels in the maximum connected component per parcel, where
a higher SC indicates a better spatial continuity. 2) Dice Coefficient (Dice) measures
the spatial overlap of the corresponding parcels across subjects, where a high value
indicates a high consistency. 3) Relative Standard Deviation (RSD) is calculated by
taking the variance of the Fractional Anisotropy (FA) values of all voxels within each
parcel, dividing it by the mean, and then averaging this result across all parcels, where
a lower RSD indicates better distinctiveness between different parcels.

3.2. Determination of Parcel Quantity: Effect of Major Parameters

   In our parcellation algorithm, two parameters are particularly important. One is
k, which represents the number of streamline clusters for clustering all streamlines
passing through the nucleus structure. The other is c, which represents the final number
of parcels into which the target nucleus is divided. To explore reasonable values for k


                                           12
and c, we investigate all hyperparameter combinations of k = 25, 50, 100, 150, 200,
and c ranging from 3 to 13 for both the amygdala and thalamus. For the parcellation
results of each hyperparameter combination, we evaluate the effectiveness using the
aforementioned three metrics: Dice, SC, and RSD. For SC and RSD, we compute the
mean value across all testing subjects. For Dice, we compute the mean score across all
testing subject pairs for each parcel and then the average Dice across all parcels.
   Figures 4 and 5 give the metrics obtained for each set of parameter settings for the
amygdala and thalamus, respectively. Regarding the impact of the number of parcels
c, we observe that as c increases, the distinctiveness between parcels improves (indi-
cated by lower RSD values). However, this comes at the cost of reduced spatial overlap
(lower Dice scores) and decreased spatial continuity of the parcels (lower SC values).
As for the effect of the number of streamline clusters k, the performance across the
three metrics generally improves as k increases gradually, reaching an optimal point
under each c setting, after which further increases in k lead to a decline in perfor-
mance. We make these choices after comprehensively considering the Dice, SC, and
RSD metrics, as well as the additional computational overhead associated with increas-
ing the k value. We ultimately choose k = 100 and c = 9 for the amygdala, and k = 150
and c = 11 for the thalamus. To validate the biological relevance of our parcellation
results, we compute FA values for each parcel within the segmented nucleus structures.
For each subject, FA values are calculated for all voxels within each identified parcel,
and the distributions of the parcel mean FA are analyzed across subjects. The results
are presented as box plots in Figures 6 and 7. For the amygdala (Figure 6), FA values
range from low anisotropy regions (Parcels 9 and 4, median ∼0.16) to high anisotropy
regions (Parcel 5, median ∼0.35). The thalamus parcellation (Figure 7) shows similar
heterogeneity, with FA values ranging from ∼0.24 to ∼0.40 across different parcels.
These distinct FA distributions indicate that our parcellation captures meaningful mi-
crostructural differences between subdivisions.




                                           13
Figure 4: Metrics for amygdala parcellation.




Figure 5: Metrics for thalamus parcellation.




                    14
                    Figure 6: FA value distribution across 9 amygdala parcels.




                   Figure 7: FA value distribution across 11 thalamus parcels.


3.3. Comparison across Different Methods

   We compare the following methods: 1) the baseline k-means method that applies
the traditional k-means clustering method directly on the input connectivity feature
representation, 2) the feat-orig method that applies the proposed network on the orig-
inal feature vector [36] (as introduced in Section 2.2.2) without the streamline cluster
dilation and smoothing process, 3) the net-orig method that applies the original deep


                                               15
clustering network [37] (as introduced in Section 2.3) on our proposed connectivity
feature representation, and 4) our method that applies the proposed autoencoder-based
k-means-friendly network (Section 2.3) to the proposed connectivity feature represen-
tation (Section 2.2). Table 1 and Table 2 give the comparison results, where our method
in general obtains the best performance across all compared methods.


Table 1: Quantitative comparison across different methods for the amygdala parcellation. For the Dice
overlap, the averaged metric for each parcel p is also provided.

                                                                    Dice
      Amygdala SC RSD
                                   Avg p1          p2     p3       p4   p5   p6   p7     p8     p9

      k-means        0.57 0.48 0.19 0.22 0.37 0.16 0.23 0.15 0.10 0.25 0.10 0.17
      feat-orig      0.75 0.48 0.20 0.17 0.60 0.12 0.28 0.10 0.09 0.16 0.12 0.14
      net-orig       0.98 0.46 0.42 0.33 0.50 0.44 0.34 0.48 0.54 0.44 0.43 0.30
      ours           0.99 0.47 0.50 0.58 0.50 0.43 0.58 0.46 0.50 0.51 0.46 0.45



Table 2: Quantitative comparison across different methods for the thalamus parcellation. For the Dice over-
lap, the averaged metric for each parcel p is also provided.

                                                                    Dice
Thalamus SC RSD
                             Avg p1         p2    p3      p4       p5   p6   p7   p8    p9    p10 p11

k-means        0.35 0.44 0.20 0.29 0.19 0.16 0.12 0.33 0.14 0.36 0.27 0.13 0.12 0.14
feat-orig      0.55 0.43 0.21 0.53 0.18 0.28 0.22 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.41 0.04 0.24 0.10
net-orig       0.99 0.42 0.65 0.66 0.68 0.68 0.56 0.69 0.67 0.61 0.65 0.59 0.65 0.68
ours           0.99 0.42 0.66 0.64 0.72 0.73 0.58 0.67 0.67 0.58 0.68 0.60 0.72 0.67




                                                     16
3.4. Visualization of Parcellation Results and Comparison with Existing Atlas




Figure 8: Visualization of the parcellation results obtained using the proposed method of two randomly
selected subjects.


    To assess our parcellation methodology, we conduct a comparative analysis with
established atlases. Specifically, for the amygdala parcellation, we leverage the SPM
Anatomy Toolbox [23], which categorizes the amygdala into three distinct subdivi-
sions: LB, CM, and SF segments. For the thalamus parcellation, we utilize the Mel-
bourne Subcortex Atlas s3 [55], which classifies the thalamus into six delineated re-
gions: medial ventroposterior (VPm), lateral ventroposterior (VPl), inferior ventroan-
terior (VAi), superior ventroanterior (VAs), medial dorsoanterior (DAm), and lateral
dorsoanterior (DAl).
    To visualize the quality of the learned latent representations, we perform t-SNE
[56] analysis on the autoencoder embeddings. For each parcel, we randomly sample 10
voxels per subject and visualize their embeddings in the learned feature space (Figures
9 and 10). The t-SNE plots demonstrate clear clustering of voxels according to their
parcel assignments, confirming that our autoencoder successfully learns discriminative
features that align well with the final parcellation results.




                                                 17
Figure 9: t-SNE visualization of learned voxel embeddings for amygdala parcellation.




Figure 10: t-SNE visualization of learned voxel embeddings for thalamus parcellation.




                                        18
Figure 11: Visualization of the group-wise parcellation result (the heatmap presented in the top row for each
parcel), with comparison to the existing parcellation atlases (the color label presented in the top row for each
parcel).


    Figure 8 and Figure 11 give a visualization of our subject-specific and group-wise
parcellations of the amygdala and thalamus, respectively, as well as the SPM atlas
for the amygdala and the Melbourne Subcortex Atlas s3 for the thalamus. For the
amygdala, we have three parcels for CM, two for SF, and four for LB, each highly
visually overlapping with the corresponding atlas parcel. For the thalamus, we have one
parcel for VPm, two for VPl, four for VAi, one for VAs, two for DAm, and one for DAl.
Quantitatively, the average Dice coefficient between our parcels and the corresponding
atlas parcels is 0.72 for the amygdala and 0.62 for the thalamus.




                                                      19
4. Discussion and Conclusion

    In this work, we propose DeepNuParc, a novel deep clustering pipeline to perform
parcellation of the brain nuclei with dMRI tractography. In our proposed framework,
we first compute a novel voxel-wise connectivity feature representation, with a feature
refinement process using the newly proposed streamline cluster dilation and smooth-
ing. Next, we design an adaptive k-means-friendly autoencoder framework that can
compress the feature representation and jointly train with the downstream clustering
algorithm. Finally, we achieve fine-scale parcellation of the brain nucleus structure by
clustering voxels into different groups.
    A crucial step in our DeepNuParc method involves the explicit reconstruction of
dMRI tractography streamlines to create the feature representation, as opposed to rely-
ing on connectivity probabilities derived from probabilistic tractography [25, 26]. The
explicit reconstruction of tractography streamlines allows us to form streamlines that
pass through a nucleus into streamline clusters, thereby enriching the data representa-
tion. Furthermore, by constructing each voxel’s feature vector based on its traversal by
streamline clusters, we transform a complex high-dimensional brain parcellation prob-
lem into a simpler one-dimensional vector clustering problem. This approach enhances
both the simplicity and robustness of the algorithm.
    Our algorithm has good flexibility and compatibility to be modified and customized.
The entire processing framework is composed of multiple steps connected in sequence,
with each step being a module that performs a specific function. This means we can
adjust the hyperparameters of specific modules (e.g., the extent of cluster dilation or the
number of streamline clusters) or optimize the algorithms of certain modules (e.g., di-
rect extraction of the nucleus structure) to achieve adjustments or improvements in the
results. Secondly, our algorithm demonstrates a high robustness to parameter choices.
Regardless of how we adjust the parameters k or c, we consistently obtain good met-
rics. Specifically, for spatial continuity, we do not explicitly enforce that all voxels in a
parcel must be connected, yet over 99% of the voxels in the same parcel ended up be-
ing connected through the neural network’s own representation learning. This indicates
that our algorithm effectively utilizes the information present in the data.


                                             20
   We show that our parcellation results are anatomically reasonable when compared
to the existing atlases. For the amygdala, we identify nine different parcels, which
show a strong match with the previous atlas of three parcels (CM, SF, LB). There
are three parcels for CM, two for SF, and four for LB. For the thalamus, we identify
eleven parcels, which also match well with the previous atlas of six parcels (VPm,
VPl, VAi, VAs, DAm, DAl). There is one parcel for VPm, two for VPl, four for
VAi, one for VAs, two for DAm, and one for DAl. Each of these parcellated parcels
shows a highly visually overlapping with the corresponding atlas parcel. Overall, our
parcellation results, which provide finer parcellation granularity, show good alignment
with prior segmentation studies when compared to existing atlases. This suggests that
our algorithm holds promise for exploring subregions of brain nucleus structures.
   Potential limitations of the present study, including suggested future work to ad-
dress limitations, are as follows. First, in our current work, we apply DeepNuParc to
study the amygdala and thalamus. However, our method can be generally applied to
any other brain nucleus structures or gray matter structures that are connected with
white matter tracts. Therefore, it would be of interest in future work to test how our
method works on other anatomical structures. Second, our current experiments are per-
formed using the HCP dataset acquired from young healthy adults. Future work should
involve training and testing the model on datasets from diverse sources and populations,
though this presents a significant challenge. For example, clinical data with lower res-
olution (typically 2-3mm), fewer diffusion directions, and lower b-values may present
challenges for tractography quality and parcellation performance. Individuals of differ-
ent ages and those with neurological conditions may exhibit anatomical variability and
altered white matter integrity that could affect connectivity patterns. Third, our current
method focuses on using structural connectivity to perform the parcellation, while it
is an interesting direction to integrate multimodal data such as fMRI to improve the
functional coherence of the results. Fourth, in our current study, we validate the bio-
logical relevance of the obtained parcels by comparing them with existing atlases and
conducting FA distribution and embedding analyses. However, the underlying bio-
logical significance of each parcel remains unclear and warrants further investigation
using anatomical techniques such as tracer studies. Fifth, to balance computational effi-


                                           21
ciency, we used data from 100 HCP subjects for model training and testing. While this
sample size has proven sufficient for dMRI-based machine/deep learning tasks in our
prior work [57–60], we expect that increasing it would further enhance our method’s
performance.
   Overall, we show the ability to use dMRI tractography and deep learning to perform
fine-scale parcellation of brain nuclei. Our method may provide a useful tool to explore
insights into the detailed structure and function of brain nuclei.


5. Ethics Statement

   This study was conducted retrospectively using public HCP imaging data. No eth-
ical approval was required.


6. Acknowledgements

   This work is in part supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No.
2023YFE0118600), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62371107).


References

 [1] R. N. J. V. C. van Huijzen. The human central nervous system. Swiss Arch Neurol
     Psychiatr, 160:82–82, 2009.

 [2] R. J. Rushmore, K. Sunderland, H. Carrington, J. Chen, M. Halle, A. Lasso, et al.
     Anatomically curated segmentation of human subcortical structures in high reso-
     lution magnetic resonance imaging: An open science approach. Front Neuroanat,
     16:894606, 2022.

 [3] A. Puccetti, S. M. Schaefer, C. M. Van Reekum, A. D. Ong, D. M. Almeida, C. D.
     Ryff, et al. Linking amygdala persistence to real-world emotional experience and
     psychological well-being. J Neurosci, 41:3721–3730, 2021.

 [4] E. G. Jones. The Thalamus. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.




                                           22
 [5] A. Alkemade. Subdivisions and anatomical boundaries of the subthalamic nu-
     cleus. J Neurosci, 33:9233–9234, 2013.

 [6] V. N. Nikolenko, M. V. Oganesyan, N. A. Rizaeva, V. A. Kudryashova, A. T.
     Nikitina, M. P. Pavliv, et al. Amygdala: Neuroanatomical and morphophysiolog-
     ical features in terms of neurological and neurodegenerative diseases. Brain Sci,
     10, 2020.

 [7] K. Hwang, M. A. Bertolero, W. B. Liu, and M. D’Esposito. The human thalamus
     is an integrative hub for functional brain networks. J Neurosci, 37:5594–5607,
     2017.

 [8] M.-T. Herrero, C. Barcia, and J. M. Navarro. Functional anatomy of thalamus
     and basal ganglia. Childs Nerv Syst, 18:386–404, 2002.

 [9] F. M. Richardson and C. J. Price. Structural mri studies of language function in
     the undamaged brain. Brain Struct Funct, 213:511–523, 2009.

[10] M. L. Ries, C. M. Carlsson, H. A. Rowley, M. A. Sager, C. E. Gleason,
     S. Asthana, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging characterization of brain struc-
     ture and function in mild cognitive impairment: a review. J Am Geriatr Soc,
     56:920–934, 2008.

[11] E. J. L. Brunenberg, B. Platel, P. A. M. Hofman, B. M. Ter Haar Romeny, and
     V. Visser-Vandewalle. Magnetic resonance imaging techniques for visualization
     of the subthalamic nucleus. J Neurosurg, 115:971–984, 2011.

[12] Z. M. Saygin, D. Kliemann, J. E. Iglesias, A. J. W. Van Der Kouwe, E. Boyd,
     M. Reuter, et al. High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging reveals nuclei
     of the human amygdala: manual segmentation to automatic atlas. Neuroimage,
     155:370–382, 2017.

[13] J. M. Tyszka and W. M. Pauli. In vivo delineation of subdivisions of the human
     amygdaloid complex in a high-resolution group template. Hum Brain Mapp,
     37:3979–3998, 2016.


                                         23
[14] M. Saranathan, C. Iglehart, M. Monti, T. Tourdias, and B. Rutt. In vivo high-
     resolution structural mri-based atlas of human thalamic nuclei. Sci Data, 8:275,
     2021.

[15] L. A. Massey, M. A. Miranda, L. Zrinzo, O. Al-Helli, H. G. Parkes, J. S. Thornton,
     et al. High resolution mr anatomy of the subthalamic nucleus: imaging at 9.4 t
     with histological validation. Neuroimage, 59:2035–2044, 2012.

[16] R. J. Rushmore, P. Wilson-Braun, G. Papadimitriou, I. Ng, Y. Rathi, F. Zhang,
     et al. 3d exploration of the brainstem in 50-micron resolution mri. Front Neu-
     roanat, 14:40, 2020.

[17] S. B. Eickhoff, B. Thirion, G. Varoquaux, and D. Bzdok. Connectivity-based
     parcellation: Critique and implications. Hum Brain Mapp, 36:4771–4792, 2015.

[18] A. Messé. Parcellation influence on the connectivity-based structure-function
     relationship in the human brain. Hum Brain Mapp, 41:1167–1180, 2020.

[19] X. Zhang, H. Cheng, Z. Zuo, K. Zhou, F. Cong, B. Wang, et al. Individualized
     functional parcellation of the human amygdala using a semi-supervised clustering
     method: A 7t resting state fmri study. Front Neurosci, 12:270, 2018.

[20] K. Bielski, S. Adamus, E. Kolada, J. Raczaszek-Leonardi,
                                           ˛                  and I. Szatkowska. Par-
     cellation of the human amygdala using recurrence quantification analysis. Neu-
     roimage, 227:117644, 2021.

[21] Y. Yang, L. Fan, C. Chu, J. Zhuo, J. Wang, P. T. Fox, et al. Identifying functional
     subdivisions in the human brain using meta-analytic activation modeling-based
     parcellation. Neuroimage, 124:300–309, 2016.

[22] P. Moghimi, A. T. Dang, Q. Do, T. I. Netoff, K. O. Lim, and G. Atluri. Evalua-
     tion of functional mri-based human brain parcellation: a review. J Neurophysiol,
     128:197–217, 2022.

[23] S. B. Eickhoff, K. E. Stephan, H. Mohlberg, C. Grefkes, G. R. Fink, K. Amunts,
     et al. A new spm toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and
     functional imaging data. NeuroImage, pages 1325–1335, 2005.


                                          24
[24] Q. Wen, B. D. Stirling, L. Sha, L. Shen, P. J. Whalen, and Y.-C. Wu. Parcellation
     of human amygdala subfields using orientation distribution function and spectral
     k-means clustering. In CDMRI, pages 123–132, 2016.

[25] M. Avecillas-Chasin, S. Levinson, T. Kuhn, M. Omidbeigi, J.-P. Langevin,
     N. Pouratian, et al. Connectivity-based parcellation of the amygdala and iden-
     tification of its main white matter connections. Sci Rep, 13:1305, 2023.

[26] Z. M. Saygin, D. E. Osher, J. Augustinack, B. Fischl, and J. D. E. Gabrieli.
     Connectivity-based segmentation of human amygdala nuclei using probabilistic
     tractography. Neuroimage, 56:1353–1361, 2011.

[27] A. Bisecco, M. A. Rocca, E. Pagani, et al. Connectivity-based parcellation of the
     thalamus in multiple sclerosis and its implications for cognitive impairment: A
     multicenter study. Human brain mapping, 36:2809–2825, 2015.

[28] P. J. Basser, S. Pajevic, C. Pierpaoli, J. Duda, and A. Aldroubi. In vivo fiber
     tractography using dt-mri data. Magn Reson Med, 44:625–632, 2000.

[29] F. Zhang, A. Daducci, Y. He, S. Schiavi, C. Seguin, R. E. Smith, et al. Quantitative
     mapping of the brain’s structural connectivity using diffusion mri tractography: A
     review. Neuroimage, 249:118870, 2022.

[30] G. A. Basile, A. Bramanti, S. Bertino, G. Cutroneo, A. Bruno, A. Tisano,
     et al. Structural connectivity-based parcellation of the dopaminergic midbrain
     in healthy subjects and schizophrenic patients. Medicina, 56, 2020.

[31] A. Zolal, W. H. Polanski, L. Klingelhoefer, H. H. Kitzler, J. Linn, D. Podlesek,
     et al. Parcellation of the subthalamic nucleus in parkinson’s disease: A retrospec-
     tive analysis of atlas- and diffusion-based methods. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg,
     98:416–423, 2020.

[32] D. Milardi, G. A. Basile, J. Faskowitz, S. Bertino, A. Quartarone, G. P. Anas-
     tasi, et al. Effects of diffusion signal modeling and segmentation approaches on
     subthalamic nucleus parcellation. Neuroimage, 250:118959, 2022.


                                           25
[33] E. Najdenovska, Y. Alemán-Gómez, G. Battistella, et al. In-vivo probabilistic
     atlas of human thalamic nuclei based on diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance
     imaging. Scientific data, 5(1):1–11, 2018.

[34] F. Zhang, K. I. K. Cho, J. Seitz-Holland, L. Ning, J. H. Legarreta, Y. Rathi, et al.
     Ddparcel: deep learning anatomical brain parcellation from diffusion mri. IEEE
     TMI, 43(3):1191–1202, 2023.

[35] Y. Chen, C. Zhang, T. Xue, Y. Song, N. Makris, Y. Rathi, et al. Deep fiber clus-
     tering: Anatomically informed fiber clustering with self-supervised deep learning
     for fast and effective tractography parcellation. Neuroimage, 273:120086, 2023.

[36] X. Xu, Y. Chen, L. Zekelman, Y. Rathi, N. Makris, F. Zhang, et al. Tractography-
     based parcellation of cerebellar dentate nuclei via a deep nonnegative matrix fac-
     torization clustering method. In ISBI, pages 1–4, 2023.

[37] B. Yang, X. Fu, N. D. Sidiropoulos, and M. Hong. Towards k-means-friendly
     spaces: Simultaneous deep learning and clustering. In ICML, pages 3861–3870,
     2017.

[38] V. E. Stephen, D. Barch, T. Behrens, E. Yacoub, and K. Ugurbil. The wu-minn
     human connectome project: An overview. Neuroimage, 80:62–79, 2013.

[39] H. He, C. Zhu, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Xu, Y. Chen, et al. A novel deep clustering
     framework for fine-scale parcellation of amygdala using dmri tractography. In
     ISBI, pages 1–5, 2024.

[40] M. F. Glasser, S. N. Sotiropoulos, J. A. Wilson, T. S. Coalson, B. Fischl, J. L.
     Andersson, et al. The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the human connectome
     project. Neuroimage, 80:105–124, 2013.

[41] R. S. Desikan, F. Ségonne, B. Fischl, B. T. Quinn, B. C. Dickerson, D. Blacker,
     et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on
     mri scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage, 31:968–980, 2006.




                                           26
[42] C. P. Reddy and Y. Rathi. Joint multi-fiber noddi parameter estimation and trac-
     tography using the unscented information filter. Front Neurosci, 10, 2016.

[43] I. Norton, W. I. Essayed, F. Zhang, S. Pujol, A. Yarmarkovich, A. J. Golby, et al.
     Slicerdmri: Open source diffusion mri software for brain cancer research. Cancer
     Res, 77:e101–e103, 2017.

[44] F. Zhang, T. Noh, P. Juvekar, S. F. Frisken, L. Rigolo, I. Norton, et al. Slicerdmri:
     Diffusion mri and tractography research software for brain cancer surgery plan-
     ning and visualization. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics, pages 299–309, 2020.

[45] F. Zhang, Y. Wu, I. Norton, L. Rigolo, Y. Rathi, N. Makris, et al. An anatomi-
     cally curated fiber clustering white matter atlas for consistent white matter tract
     parcellation across the lifespan. Neuroimage, 179:429–447, 2018.

[46] C. Baumgartner, O. Michailovich, J. Levitt, O. Pasternak, S. Bouix, C. Westin,
     et al. A unified tractography framework for comparing diffusion models on clin-
     ical scans. In Computational Diffusion MRI Workshop of MICCAI, Nice, pages
     27–32, 2012.

[47] Z. Chen, Y. Tie, O. Olubiyi, F. Zhang, A. Mehrtash, L. Rigolo, et al. Corti-
     cospinal tract modeling for neurosurgical planning by tracking through regions of
     peritumoral edema and crossing fibers using two-tensor unscented kalman filter
     tractography. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg, 11:1475–1486, 2016.

[48] R. Liao, L. Ning, Z. Chen, L. Rigolo, S. Gong, O. Pasternak, et al. Performance of
     unscented kalman filter tractography in edema: Analysis of the two-tensor model.
     Neuroimage Clin, 15:819–831, 2017.

[49] T. Xue, F. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Song, A. J. Golby, et al. Superficial white
     matter analysis: An efficient point-cloud-based deep learning framework with su-
     pervised contrastive learning for consistent tractography parcellation across pop-
     ulations and dmri acquisitions. Med Image Anal, 85:102759, 2023.

[50] L. J. O’Donnell and C.-F. Westin. Automatic tractography segmentation using a
     high-dimensional white matter atlas. IEEE TMI, 26:1562–1575, 2007.


                                           27
[51] L. J. O’Donnell, W. M. III Wells, A. J. Golby, and C.-F. Westin. Unbiased group-
     wise registration of white matter tractography. In MICCAI, pages 123–130, 2012.

[52] F. Zhang, G. Xie, L. Leung, M. A. Mooney, L. Epprecht, I. Norton, et al. Creation
     of a novel trigeminal tractography atlas for automated trigeminal nerve identifi-
     cation. Neuroimage, 220:117063, 2020.

[53] F. Zhang, S. Cetin Karayumak, N. Hoffmann, Y. Rathi, A. J. Golby, and L. J.
     O’Donnell. Deep white matter analysis (deepwma): Fast and consistent tractog-
     raphy segmentation. Med Image Anal, 65:101761, 2020.

[54] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger. Densely connected
     convolutional networks. In CVPR, pages 2261–2269, 2017.

[55] Y. Tian, D. S. Margulies, M. Breakspear, and A. Zalesky. Topographic organiza-
     tion of the human subcortex unveiled with functional connectivity gradients. Nat
     Neurosci, 23:1421–1432, 2020.

[56] L. Maaten and G. Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
     learning research, 9:2579–2605, 2008.

[57] F. Zhang, W. M. Wells, and L. J. O’Donnell. Deep diffusion mri registration (ddm-
     reg): a deep learning method for diffusion mri registration. IEEE transactions on
     medical imaging, 41(6):1454–1467, 2021.

[58] F. Zhang, Y. Wu, I. Norton, et al. An anatomically curated fiber clustering white
     matter atlas for consistent white matter tract parcellation across the lifespan. Neu-
     roimage, 179:429–447, 2018.

[59] F. Zhang, A. Breger, K. I. K. Cho, et al. Deep learning based segmentation of
     brain tissue from diffusion mri. NeuroImage, 233:117934, 2021.

[60] F. Zhang, S. C. Karayumak, N. Hoffmann, et al. Deep white matter analysis
     (deepwma): Fast and consistent tractography segmentation. Medical image anal-
     ysis, 65:101761, 2020.



                                           28
