                                                  Temporal Functional Factor Analysis of Brain Connectivity
                                                                  Kyle Stanley∗             Nicole Lazar†             Matthew Reimherr‡



                                                                                                    Abstract
arXiv:2510.15580v1 [stat.AP] 17 Oct 2025




                                                     Many analyses of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) examine functional connectivity
                                                 (FC), or the statistical dependencies among distant brain regions. These analyses are typically ex-
                                                 ploratory, guiding future confirmatory research. In this work, we present an approach based on factor
                                                 analysis (FA) that is well-suited to studying FC. FA is appealing in this context because its flexible model
                                                 assumptions permit a guided investigation of its target subspace consistent with the exploratory role of
                                                 connectivity analyses. However, applying FA to fMRI data poses three problems: (1) its target subspace
                                                 captures short-range spatial dependencies that should be treated as noise, (2) it requires factorization of
                                                 a massive spatial covariance, and (3) it overlooks temporal dependencies in the data. To address these
                                                 limitations, we develop a factor model within the framework of functional data analysis–a field which
                                                 views certain data as arising from smooth underlying curves. The proposed approach (1) uses matrix
                                                 completion techniques to filter short-range spatial dependencies out of its target subspace, (2) employs
                                                 a distributed algorithm for factorizing large-scale covariance matrices, and (3) leverages functional re-
                                                 gression to exploit temporal dynamics. Together, these innovations yield a comprehensive and scalable
                                                 method for studying FC.

                                           Keywords: factor analysis, fMRI, functional connectivity, functional data analysis, matrix completion


                                           1     Introduction
                                           Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is among the most widely used techniques for studying
                                           brain function. It is based on the haemodynamic response, a phenomenon wherein oxygenated blood rushes
                                           to active neuronal tissue. By measuring relative oxygenation levels across the brain, BOLD imaging allows
                                           researchers to indirectly study brain activity. During an fMRI session, a subject lies in a scanner that collects
                                           a temporal sequence of three-dimensional BOLD images, discretized by a grid of volume elements, called
                                           voxels [Lazar, 2008, Lindquist, 2008]. The resulting data are both large and complex. Each brain image
                                           contains more than 100 thousand voxels, each session includes hundreds of these images, and many modern
                                           fMRI datasets contain hundreds of such sessions. Moreover, these data exhibit spatiotemporal dependencies
                                           that complicate their study.
                                               Analyses of fMRI data may be hypothesis- or data-driven. Hypothesis-driven studies aim to localize
                                           regions of the brain activated by a certain stimulus. In such studies, the researcher constructs a hypothesized
                                           time course for a voxel activated by the stimulus, then uses a statistical model to independently test whether
                                           each voxel’s time course is related to the hypothesized one [Friston et al., 1995]. On the other hand, many
                                           data-driven studies seek to characterize functional connectivity (FC), or the statistical dependencies among
                                           distant brain regions [Friston, 2011]. The simplest FC approach is to create a spatial map that visualizes
                                           correlations between the time course of a seed region and those of other regions [Biswal et al., 1995]. Other
                                           approaches, like principal component analysis (PCA; Jolliffe, 1986) and independent component analysis
                                           (ICA; Hyvärinen et al., 2004), are based on linear latent variable models (LLVMs) that represent an fMRI
                                           scan as a set of spatial maps and their associated time courses. Data-driven approaches do not require
                                           specification of hypothetical time courses, making them particularly useful in the analysis of resting-state
                                              ∗ Department     of      Biostatistics,    Epidemiology,       and     Informatics,      University     of   Pennsylvania.
                                           kyle.stanley2@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
                                              † Department of Statistics and Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University. nfl5182@psu.edu
                                              ‡ Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, and Amazon Science. mlr36@psu.edu




                                                                                                        1
fMRI (rsfMRI), wherein subjects simply lie at rest in the scanner. Such methods play an exploratory role
in brain science, aiding in the discovery of unanticipated connectivity that can inform hypothesis-driven
confirmatory analyses. In this work, we develop a novel LLVM to study FC in resting-state data from
the PIOP1 dataset of the Amsterdam Open MRI Collection (AOMIC; Snoek et al., 2021), which contain
six-minute scans collected from 210 subjects at rest.
    LLVMs describe an M -by-J fMRI data matrix X (M the number of voxels and J the number of time
points) as the sum of a “signal” term Y having rank K < min{M, J} and a “noise” term ϵ:

                                                 X = |{z}
                                                     LF +ϵ,
                                                       Y

where the columns of L ∈ RM ×K contain K spatial maps and the rows of F ∈ RK×J contain their accompa-
nying time courses. Simply put, LLVMs posit that the interesting behavior in an fMRI scan can be described
by a few spatial maps that are activated according to their time courses. See Figure 1 for an illustration of
this LLVM framework. Choosing from among the many possible (L, F ) reduces to answering the following
questions:
  1. What is the “target subspace” (fixes Y = span(L))?
  2. How should the target subspace be “expressed” (fixes L)?
In what follows, we critique how existing LLVMs answer these questions, and offer better calibrated responses
that motivate development of our LLVM.




Figure 1: A depiction of the LLVM framework when M = 3, J = 5, and K = 2 (e.g., five time points of a
three-voxel brain image modeled by a two-component LLVM).

    Fixing the target subspace is equivalent to specifying how noise contaminates the spatial covariance. To
see this, let C = XX T = C Y + C ϵ be the decomposition of the spatial covariance into signal and noise
covariances. Given the noise covariance C ϵ , the signal covariance C Y can be written as LLT for some
M -by-K matrix L, thereby fixing Y = span(L). Noiseless PCA and ICA set C ϵ equal to the zero matrix
(i.e., all variation is viewed as signal) while their noisy analogues [Tipping and Bishop, 1999, Beckmann and
Smith, 2004] set C ϵ = σ 2 I for some σ > 0 (i.e., all variation except “background noise” is viewed as signal).
This raises the question: is the noise structure specified by these models well-calibrated to the study of FC?
Since it is unreasonable to expect the low-rank signal term of an LLVM to span variation at all spatial scales,
a more suitable LLVM should absorb short-range spatial dependencies. Classifying such structure as noise
is especially sensible in FC, where the aim is to describe long-range spatial dependencies.
    Fixing Y does not uniquely identify an LLVM, as there exist numerous expressions of Y: span(LT ) =
span(L) = Y for any invertible K-by-K matrix T . Many LLVMs fix L by imposing additional constraints.
For instance, PCA assumes the columns of L are orthogonal and the rows of F are uncorrelated, while
ICA assumes the rows of F are statistically independent. This leads to the question: in the study of
FC, is it appropriate to limit oneself to a single expression of the target subspace? Given the exploratory
nature of these studies, a more apt approach would permit a principled investigation of the target subspace,
and might lead to the discovery of connectivity structures obscured by the unique representations of other
LLVMs. Factor analysis (FA; Harman, 1976, Johnson and Wichern, 2002), a method rarely encountered


                                                       2
in FC research, provides a natural framework in which to conduct subspace exploration, and serves as the
starting point in development of our approach.
    FA posits that an observation vector X ∈ RM (e.g., BOLD observations of an M -voxel brain image
at a fixed time point) having covariance C ∈ RM ×M is the sum of a common component, given by linear
combinations of zero-mean factors F ∈ RK having covariance E[F F T ] = I, and a unique component, given
by a vector of uncorrelated zero-mean errors ϵ ∈ RM :

                                                 X = LF + ϵ,

where L ∈ RM ×K is called the loading matrix. If D ∈ RM ×M denotes the diagonal covariance matrix of ϵ,
then C decomposes as
                                            C = LLT + D.                                           (1)
Since D is diagonal, LLT must account for all variation off the diagonal of C. This observation sheds light on
the named components of the model: the common component describes all between-variable variation while
the unique component describes leftover within-variable variation. After fixing Y = span(L), FA explores
this target subspace through through various factor rotations. In orthogonal rotation, one rotates the initial
expression by an orthonormal matrix R ∈ RK×K to preserve Y and factor uncorrelatedness:

                                           L∗ F ∗ = (LR)(RT F ) = LF
                                      E[F ∗ F ∗T ] = RT E[F F T ]R = I.

In oblique rotation, one rotates the initial expression by an invertible matrix T ∈ RK×K to preserve Y and
induce correlations among the factors:

                                         L∗ F ∗ = (LT −1 )(T F ) = LF
                                     E[F ∗ F ∗T ] = T T E[F F T ]T = T T T .

The matrices R and T are not chosen arbitrarily. Typically, one selects R or T to optimize some objective
criterion–like varimax [Kaiser, 1958] or quartimin [Jennrich and Sampson, 1966]–that encourages a more
interpretable simple loading structure, in which (loosely speaking) L contains a few high-magnitude weights
and many near-zero weights. In this way, factor rotation enables a principled investigation of Y that lends
itself to the inherently exploratory task of studying FC.
     There are, however, three obstacles impeding application of FA to fMRI. First, the unique component
fails to capture short-range spatial dependencies. As discussed, these dependencies ought to reside within
the noise term since (a) such structure arises naturally in the residuals of low-rank LLVMs fit to fMRI
data, and (b) FC is concerned only with long-range spatial dependencies. Second, model estimation requires
factorization of a massive (voxel-by-voxel) spatial covariance. Other LLVMs, like PCA and ICA, circumvent
this computational hurdle by transposing the problem, replacing X with X T , so that estimation is based
on a much smaller temporal covariance [McKeown et al., 1998, Beckmann and Smith, 2004]. This strategy,
however, prevents the decoupling of long- and short-range spatial variation, and is thus ineffectual for a
model that addresses the first obstacle. Third, FA overlooks the temporal structure in fMRI data, treating
the brain images X 1 , . . . , X J of an fMRI session as independent. A more appropriate approach would exploit
this structure to improve estimation of temporal quantities.
     To develop a better-suited factor model, we place fMRI within the framework of functional data analysis
(FDA; Ramsay and Silverman, 2005, Wang et al., 2016, Kokoszka and Reimherr, 2017). Data are functional
if it is natural to assume they arise from some smooth underlying curve. Since one may treat BOLD observa-
tions of an fMRI scan as noisy realizations from some smooth function over a four-dimensional spatiotemporal
domain, fMRI (and other spatiotemporal) data are an example of multidimensional functional data. Though
used sparingly by the neuroimaging community, FDA tools occasionally appear in the literature: functional
PCA (FPCA, Viviani et al., 2005), functional regression [Reiss et al., 2015, 2017], and functional graphical
models [Li and Solea, 2018]. To tailor FA to fMRI data, we extend the FA model to this spatiotemporal
functional setting.
     This paper builds upon the work of and may be viewed as a sequel to Stanley et al. [2025]. Their key
insight was to extend FA to discretely-observed functional data by replacing the common-unique decom-
position of multivariate FA with a global-local decomposition that separates long- and short-range spatial


                                                       3
dependencies. Leveraging the work of Descary and Panaretos [2019], they show that if the global covari-
ance is smooth with finite rank and the local covariance is banded, then this decomposition is identifiable.
However, their approach, called functional FA (FFA), still requires factorization of a large spatial covariance
and ignores the temporal dependencies in fMRI data. They accommodate these limitations by restricting
analysis to a horizontal slice of the brain and prewhitening voxel time courses. This work addresses the
shortcomings of Stanley et al. [2025]. First, it leverages the distributed algorithm of Stanley et al. [2025+]
to enable full-brain model estimation. Second, it acknowledges the temporal structure of fMRI data via
incorporation of temporal factors whose scores may be computed using techniques from functional regres-
sion. The resulting approach, called temporal FFA (TFFA), represents a collection of fMRI scans as a set of
common spatial maps and their affiliated subject-wise time courses.
    We begin, in Section 2, by presenting the TFFA model at both infinite- and finite-resolution. Section 3
develops estimation methods for the finite-resolution model, which are studied in the simulations of Section
4. We then, in Section 5, use TFFA to analyze the AOMIC resting-state data. We conclude with some final
remarks in Section 6.


2     The Model and its Identification
Since there are four dimensions in fMRI, three spatial and one temporal, there are actually several ways
to view such data as functional–e.g., a collection of (i) spatial functions indexed over time, (ii) temporal
functions indexed over space, or (iii) spatiotemporal functions indexed (in the multi-subject setting) over
subjects. In this paper, we adopt view (iii).
    We present our factor model for spatiotemporal functional data in two data observation paradigms, the
first serving as a stepping stone to the second. The first assumes data are observed completely (e.g., a
brain scan with infinite spatiotemporal resolution, making it a function), while the second assumes data are
observed discretely on a grid (e.g., a brain scan with finite spatiotemporal resolution, making it a tensor).
Unless coerced into some non-traditional format, fMRI data falls into this latter paradigm.

2.1    Infinite Resolution
Let Xi be the ith subject’s zero-mean spatiotemporal random function in L2 ([0, 1]D+1 ), which is endowed
with the typical inner product and norm:
                                   Z
                                                                     2
                        ⟨f, g⟩L2 =       f (s, t)g(s, t)dsdt and ∥f ∥L2 = ⟨f, f ⟩L2 .
                                    [0,1]D+1

In fMRI, D = 3 and Xi (s, t) is a scan whose BOLD observations are accessible at infinite spatial and temporal
resolution. The covariance function of Xi is given by

                                      ci (s, t, s′ , t′ ) = E[Xi (s, t)Xi (s′ , t′ )].

We say Xi follows a temporal functional factor model (TFFM) with K factors if
                                                    K
                                                    X
                                      Xi (s, t) =         lk (s)Fi,k (t) +ϵi (s, t),
                                                    k=1
                                                    |        {z        }
                                                           Yi (s,t)

where Yi and ϵi are the global and local components and, within the global component, lk and Fi,k are
the kth loading function and functional factor. The model assumes the loadings lk are sufficiently smooth
(in a senseRto be defined in Section 2.1.2), and that the local covariance is δ-banded when integrated over
time, i.e., E[ϵi (s, t)ϵi (s′ , t)]dt = 0 when sd − s′d ≥ δd > 0 for some d = 1, . . . , D. We call Yi the global
term since, as a finite separable sum with smooth spatial components, it contains all spatial variation in
Xi that is sustained and long-range. On the other hand, we call ϵi the local term since its banded spatial
covariance ensures it absorbs all sustained short-range spatial variation in the data that is not incidentally
captured by Yi . That the two terms characterize “sustained” variation arises from the integral assumption


                                                             4
on the local covariance (see Remark 2.1 for details). In what follows, we often condense notation by writing
l(s) = [l1 (s), . . . , lK (s)] and F (t) = [F1 (t), . . . , FK (t)].
    Let gi and bi denote the covariance functions of Yi and ϵi , respectively. Assume the random subject-
specific factors Fi,k and local term ϵi are mean-zero and satisfy
                                                  Z
                                                      E[F i (t)F Ti (t)]dt = I and                       (2)
                                                 Z
                                                     E[F i (t)ϵi (s, t)]dt = 0.                          (3)

That is, the factors are uncorrelated with unit variance “on average”, and the factors and errors are uncorre-
lated “on average”. If these conditions hold, then the marginal spatial covariance csi , obtained by integrating
ci (s, t, s′ , t) over t, decomposes as
                                              Z 1                           K
                                                                            X
                            csi (s, s′ ) :=                    ′
                                                    ci (s, t, s , t)dt =          lk (s)lk (s′ ) +bsi (s, s),   (4)
                                               0                            k=1
                                                                            |        {z         }
                                                                                  g s (s,s′ )

where g s is the global spatial covariance common to all subjects, and bsi is the local spatial covariance for
subject i. Note that, in the decomposition of (4), only g s does not depend on the subject. It turns out that
the local spatial covariance need not be the same for every subject in order to identify g s . By fixing g s ,
TFFA fixes its target subspace Y = span(l1 , . . . , lK ).
    If λk and ηk are the kth eigenvalue and eigenfunction of g s , respectively, it is easy to show that one may
rotate the scaled eigenfunctions η̃k = λ1/2 ηk by some orthonormal matrix R to recover the lk (see Section 2.1
of the supplement). However, one does not know this rotation in practice. In fact, every rotation of the scaled
eigenfunctions leads to a statistically equivalent model (i.e., each produces the global term and uncorrelated
factors; see Section 2.1 of the supplement). In practice, we exploit this ambiguity by exploring the global
subspace Y through simplicity-inducing orthogonal rotation procedures, which we review in Section 3.2.
Remark 2.1 (Integrated vs. Pointwise Conditions). To guarantee the spatial covariance decomposition of
(4), the TFFM imposes several conditions which involve integrating over time. A stronger set of assumptions
leading to the same decomposition replaces these integral conditions with pointwise conditions (e.g., factors
are pointwise uncorrelated with unit variance). Even in the resting-state setting, wherein the absence of
stimuli might lead one to expect temporal uniformity, these pointwise assumptions are too restrictive. By
instead constraining the integrals, we impose conditions on “average” behavior rather than pointwise behavior.
This provides a great deal of flexibility. For instance, factors may be transiently correlated and have time-
varying variance so long as they are uncorrelated with unit variance “on average”. This averaging does,
however, admit a pathological peculiarity. Consider two distant spatial locations s and s′ whose BOLD
observations have covariance a when 0 ≤ t < 1/2 and −a when 1/2 ≤ t ≤ 1. Though this contrived data
contains pointwise global variation (i.e., g(s, t, s′ , t) ̸= 0 for all t), integration removes this structure from
the global spatial covariance (i.e., g s (s, s′ ) = 0). Consequently, the TFFM may fail to detect transient global
structure and is best understood as decomposing spatial variation into “sustained” global and local modes.

2.1.1   Correlated Factors
We refer to the model thus presented as the orthogonal TFFM, as its factors are (on average) uncorrelated.
The oblique TFFM relaxes the assumption in (2), permitting sustained correlation among the factors:
                                         Z
                                           E[F i (t)F Ti (t)]dt = H,                                   (5)

where H is some unknown covariance matrix constrained by diag(H) = I to fix the scale of factor variances.
Under (5), the global component in the spatial covariance decomposition of (4) admits a decomposition
different from that in the orthogonal model:
                                                                   K
                                                                   X
                                                     s     ′
                                                    g (s, s ) =          ˜lk (s)˜lk (s′ ),
                                                                   k=1


                                                                    5
where ˜l(s) = l(s)V Λ1/2 and H = V ΛV T is the eigendecomposition of H. As we show in Section 2.2 of
the supplement, one may recover the loadings lk by applying some unknown invertible transformation T
to the scaled eigenfunctions η̃k . The oblique model is thus even more ambiguous than the orthogonal one.
Rather than fixing R within the space of orthonormal matrices, we must now fix T within the much larger
space of unit-diagonal invertible matrices. Though a theoretical inconvenience, this added indeterminacy
has practical appeal: by expanding the space of transformations, one may discover simpler expressions of
the spatial loadings than is possible in the orthogonal setting. This is accomplished via a suite of oblique
rotation procedures, which we review in Section 3.2. Since the sole difference between the orthogonal and
oblique models is the type of transformation applied to the scaled eigenfunctions we present our work in the
orthogonal setting, highlighting any deviations that arise in the oblique setting.

2.1.2   Global-Local Uniqueness
Regardless of whether one assumes orthogonal or oblique factors, recovery of the loading functions requires
knowledge of g s . It is thus critical that g s be uniquely determined by csi . The assumptions of the TFFM
impose two conditions on the spatial covariance decomposition: g s has finite rank, and bsi is δ-banded. These
restrictions, however, do not sufficiently constrain the problem. Given csi , we know g s off the band, but it is
not clear how to uniquely extend g s onto the band. It turns out that a particular formulation of smoothness,
called real analyticity, permits this unique extension. Guided by the work of Descary and Panaretos [2019],
Theorem 1 from Section 3.1 of the supplement in Stanley et al. [2025] shows that if, in addition, the lk are
real analytic, then g s is uniquely determined by csi . The proof exploits the so-called continuation property
of analytic functions, which states that if a function is analytic over some domain, but is known only on an
open subset of that domain, then the function extends uniquely to the rest of the domain.

2.2     Finite Resolution
In practice, we observe a spatiotemporal function Xi at finite spatial and temporal resolution. Let {Im }m∈NM
be the partition of [0, 1]D into cells of size M1−1 ×· · ·×MD
                                                            −1
                                                               , where M = (M1 , . . . , MD ) is the spatial resolution
and NM = NM1 × · · · × NMD is the set of all D-dimensional multi-indices with dth dimension no greater
than Md (i.e., NMd = {1, . . . , Md }). Given that fMRI partitions three-dimensional space into a uniform grid
of voxels, one can view Im as representing the voxel at grid coordinate m = (m1 , m2 , m3 ). We assume, as
is true in multi-subject fMRI data, that spatial images are comprised of the same M = M1 . . . MD discrete
points S = {sm ∈ Im : m ∈ NM } across subjects and time points. We also assume that each Xi is observed
on the same evenly-spaced J-resolution temporal grid T = {tj : j ∈ NJ }. As detailed in Remark 2.2, we
informally require this temporal grid to be sufficiently dense relative to the temporal smoothness of variation
in the data. This scheme gives rise to the following observation model:
                                           K
                                           X
                         Xi (sm , tj ) =         lk (sm )Fi,k (tj ) +ϵi (sm , tj ), m ∈ NM , j ∈ NJ .
                                           k=1
                                           |          {z          }
                                                  Yi (sm ,tj )


Summarizing the functional terms in the model with the tensors

                  Xi (m, j) = Xi (sm , tj ),          Yi (m, j) = Yi (sm , tj ),         Ei (m, j) = ϵi (sm , tj ),

                                      Lk (m) = lk (sm ),                Fi,k (j) = Fi,k (tj ),

we can compactly write the (M , J)-resolution TFFM with K factors as
                                                            K
                                                            X
                                                   Xi =          Lk ⊗ Fi,k +Ei ,
                                                           k=1
                                                           |      {z        }
                                                                   Yi

where ⊗ denotes the usual tensor product.


                                                                   6
Remark 2.2. (Integral Approximations) At finite resolution, we informally assume that T is dense relative
to the smoothness of several covariances: E[ϵi (s, t)ϵi (s′ , t)], E[Fi,k (t)Fi,k′ (t)], and E[Fi,k (t)ϵi (s, t)]. This
ensures discrete approximations to the integral conditions of Section 2.1 do not incur too much error:
                         Z                                   X
                            E[ϵi (s, t)ϵi (s′ , t)]dt ≈ J −1   E[ϵi (s, tj )ϵi (s′ , t′j )],
                                                                     j
                            Z                                       X
                                                               −1
                                 E[Fi,k (t)Fi,k′ (t)]dt ≈ J              E[Fi,k (tj )Fi,k′ (tj )], and
                                                                     j
                             Z                                      X
                                 E[Fi,k (t)ϵi (s, t)]dt ≈ J −1           E[Fi,k (tj )ϵi (s, tj )].
                                                                     j

The decomposition of the spatial covariance in (7) depends on these high-fidelity approximations. Note that
even if functional factors and error functions are themselves temporally rough, it is reasonable to assume
that expectations among and between these functions are smooth.
   Now, use the following M1 × · · · × MD × J × M1 × · · · × MD × J tensors to summarize discretizations of
the model’s covariance functions:

                                         Ci (m, j, m′ , j ′ ) = ci (sm , tj , sm′ , tj ′ ),
                                         Gi (m, j, m′ , j ′ ) = gi (sm , tj , sm′ , tj ′ ),
                                         Bi (m, j, m′ , j ′ ) = bi (sm , tj , sm′ , tj ′ ).


Then the full covariance decomposes as
                                                        Ci = Gi + Bi .                                             (6)
In the orthogonal context, summing each tensor in (6) over j yields the following decomposition of the spatial
covariance:
                                                K
                                                X
                                          Cis =    Lk ⊗ Lk +Bis .                                         (7)
                                                         k=1
                                                         |      {z        }
                                                                Gs

Similar to the infinite-resolution setting, the Lk are equal to the scaled eigentensors, H̃ = λ1/2 Hk , of G s up
to an orthogonal rotation, where λk and Hk are the kth eigenvalue and eigentensor of G s , respectively. Note
also that since bi is δ-banded in space, the tensor Bis is banded. Moving forward, we declutter notation by
replacing M1 × · · · × MD with M where appropriate.

2.2.1    Identifiability
Analogous to the problem posed at infinite resolution, we must uniquely identify G s from Cis . This, however,
is not obviously possible since analyticity, used to establish uniqueness at infinite resolution, is a property
of functions, not of tensors. It turns out that G s may still be identified from Cis and that analyticity plays
a crucial role. Stanley et al. [2025], guided by Descary and Panaretos [2019], establish that G s is unique
provided each δd is less than 1/2 and
                                                         D
                                                         Y
                                         K ≤ K∗ =
                                                                            
                                                            (1/2 − δd )Md − 1 .                                    (8)
                                                        d=1


3       Estimation
Estimation of quantities in the finite-resolution model proceeds in four stages: (i) subspace estimation, (ii)
subspace exploration, (iii) postprocessing, and (iv) factor score estimation. In (i), we use low-rank covariance


                                                                 7
matrix completion to estimate the global spatial covariance and define an initial expression of the associated
subspace using its scaled eigentensors. In (ii), we explore this global subspace via various orthogonal and
oblique rotations that encourage a structure simpler than that of the eigentensors. In (iii), we sharpen our
estimate of the global subspace and make its expression more interpretable through smoothing and shrinkage.
Finally, in (iv), we treat the postprocessed loadings of (iii) as fixed within the TFFM then estimate scores
for the random factors via function-on-scalar regression.

3.1    Subspace Estimation
Recall that when the data are observed at resolution (M , J) the spatial covariance for subject i decomposes
as
                                                K
                                                X
                                          Cis =    Lk ⊗ Lk +Bis .
                                                    k=1
                                                    |     {z    }
                                                          Gs

Averaging the subject-wise spatial covariances produces a structurally equivalent (smooth and low-rank, plus
banded) decomposition of the average spatial covariance,
                                                n          K
                                      s   1X s X
                                     C :=      C = Lk ⊗ L k + B s ,
                                          n i=1 i
                                                          k=1

         s    −1       s
                   P
where B = n         i Bi . Given a finite-resolution sample of spatiotemporal functions summarized by the
                          M×J                                                         s
tensors X1 , . . . , Xn ∈ R  , our goal is to estimate the global spatial covariance G from the empirical
average spatial covariance,
                                               n   J
                                          1 XX
                                   Cˆs =             (Xi − X̄ )j ⊗ (Xi − X̄ )j ,
                                         nJ i=1 j=1

where X̄ = n−1 i Xi , and (Xi − X̄ )j denotes the jth time point of the ith subject’s centered observation.
                     P

    Our definition and implementation of Ĝ s is similar to that of the global covariance estimator in the FFM
of Stanley et al. [2025]. The estimator Ĝ s is a low-rank covariance tensor that is a good approximation to
Cˆs off the band:                              (                   )
                                                              2
                               Ĝ = arg min Z ◦ Cˆ − θ
                                 s                      s
                                                                     + τ rank(θ),                           (9)
                                      θ∈ΘM                          F

where ΘM is the space of M × M covariance tensors                                   ˆs
                                               n with trace norm bounded by that of C , Z
                                                                                        o is the M × M
“band-deleting” tensor defined by Z(m, m′ ) = 1 md − m′d > ⌈Md /4⌉, for all d = 1, . . . , D , and τ > 0 is
a rank parameter. The estimator for Ĝ s may then be used to define estimators for the number of factors K
and initial loadings Lk :
                                                                1/2
                                  K̂ = rank(Ĝ s ) and L̂k = λ̂k Ĥk ,
for k = 1, . . . , K, where λ̂k and Ĥk are the kth eigenvalue and eigentensor of Ĝ s , respectively. Stanley
et al. [2025] encourage smoothness in their initial loading estimates by including a roughness penalty in their
objective function. To achieve smoothness, we instead recommend smoothing the loadings as a postprocessing
step (see Section 3.3.1). Though less streamlined than the penalization strategy of Stanley et al. [2025],
postprocessed smoothing allows for finer control of loading-specific smoothness since each tensor is smoothed
independently.
    To describe how one performs the optimization in (9), let us first assume that we have already chosen a
                                                                                    2
rank parameter τ ∗ . Define the functional f : RM×M → R by f (θ) = Z ◦ Cˆs − θ          . We then estimate G s
                                                                                       F
as follows:
 (a) Solve the optimization problem
                                          min   f (θ)     subject to    rank(θ) ≤ j,
                                    0⪯θ∈RM×M



                                                          8
      for j ∈ {1, . . . , K ∗ }, obtaining minimizers θ̂1 , . . . , θ̂K ∗ .

 (b) Compute the quantities {f (θ̂j ) + τ ∗ j : j = 1, . . . , K ∗ } and determine the j furnishing the minimum
     quantity. Declare the corresponding θ̂j to be the estimator Ĝ s .

    In practice, we do not explicitly choose the rank parameter τ . Since each τ implies a choice of rank jτ ,
and thus some f (θ̂jτ ), we use the nonincreasing function j 7→ f (θ̂j ) to implicitly select τ . Specifically, we
find the smallest j such that f (θ̂j ) < c for some threshold c, then set Gˆs to the corresponding minimizer.
The threshold c should be small enough for f evaluated at the estimator to be low, but not so small that the
estimator has large rank. We thus select the rank of the estimator by identifying the elbow of the scree-type
plot generated by the function j 7→ f (θ̂j ).




                                                             (a) Small τ




                                                             (b) Large τ

Figure 2: An illustration of the scree plot approach for selecting the number of factors using (a) a small rank
penalty τ1 and (b) a large rank penalty τ2 . Black circles represent the non-increasing function j 7→ f (θˆj ),
orange squares represent the rank penalty τ j, and blue triangles represent their sum (the function to be
minimized). The number cτ is one example of a threshold furnishing the rank jτ .

   We solve the optimization problems in (a) by formulating them as low-rank covariance matrix completion
(LRCMC) problems. Note that any rank-j covariance tensor θ ∈ RM×M has square matricization θsq ∈
RM ×M , M = M1 × · · · × MD , that may be expressed as V V T , where V ∈ RM ×j . The optimization
problems in (a) thus reduce to the factorized matrix completion problems
                                                                           2
                                                min       Z sq ◦ Cˆsq
                                                                   s
                                                                      −VVT     ,                             (10)
                                              V ∈RM ×j                        F

for j = 1, . . . , K ∗ . Although the problems in (10) are not convex in V , there is reason to trust that
gradient-based algorithms will converge to “good” local minima. One reason is that closely related problems
have no spurious local minima (i.e., all local minima are global; Ge et al., 2016). Other theory suggests
that gradient-based routines converge to statistically useful solutions given high-quality initializations [Chen
and Wainwright, 2015]. Bearing this in mind, Stanley et al. [2025] solved the problems in (10) using an
implementation of the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS; Broyden, 1970, Fletcher, 1970, Goldfarb,


                                                                  9
                                                                                       1/2
1970, Shanno, 1970) algorithm, which they initialized with V 0 = U j Σj , where U j Σj U Tj is the rank-j
truncated eigendecomposition of Cˆsq s
                                       . Although this approach indeed discovers “good” local minima, its
application does not scale to the full brain. Consider that the 300 thousand voxels in each AOMIC resting-
state scan yield a spatial covariance that consumes 365 GB when stored as 32-bit floating points. One
can shrink this problem by considering only those voxels that reside within the brain but even then the
spatial covariance at hand is massive. To start, this means that the eigendecompositon of Cˆsqs
                                                                                                required for
initialization is prohibitively expensive. We work around this by applying a randomized SVD solver [Halko
et al., 2011] to a subset of the original data that allows us to approximate the initialization of Stanley
et al. [2025]. However, the central challenge in solving (10) remains: any single-machine algorithm that
processes the full spatial covariance at once will suffer from slow iterations and, even worse, exceed the
memory limits of many machines. We address this by invoking a distributed stochastic gradient descent
(DSGD; Stanley et al., 2025) algorithm that solves a wide class of LRCMC problems, including the one in
(10). This algorithm, which adapts the procedure of Gemulla et al. [2011] to covariance matrices, requires
little inter-machine communication, and distributes the storage of large covariance matrices across multiple
machines.

3.2     Subspace Exploration
After estimating the global subspace, the next task is to choose a representation of this subspace. Of course,
we could always select the initial loadings L̂k , but these generally obscure interesting structure. This is
because eigentensors tend to have many high-magnitude weights, which complicates their identification with
parsimonious spatial maps that arise from neurological processes (e.g., visual processing). The problem
is that eigentensors must be orthogonal, a restriction that often scrambles parsimonious structure hidden
within the global subspace. Rotation can unscramble this structure, and produce interpretable loading
estimates that greatly facilitate interpretation of the latent factors. Rotations may be orthogonal or oblique,
the former preserving uncorrelated factors, and the latter inducing correlations among them. Below, we
describe several tensorial rotation procedures whose implementation reduces to transforming the matricized
tensors via a multivariate procedure. In these descriptions, let L̂ ∈ RM ×K̂ , M = M1 , . . . , MD , be the matrix
representation of the loading tensors whose kth column is the vectorization of the initial estimate of the kth
loading tensor.

3.2.1   Orthogonal Rotation
Orthogonal rotation is appropriate when one would like to study uncorrelated (on average) functional factors.
There are numerous orthogonal rotation algorithms for multivariate data, each choosing some K̂-by-K̂
orthonormal matrix R that rotates the initial loadings towards some optimal structure. Two of the most
popular orthogonal rotation procedures are quartimax [Neuhaus and Wrigley, 1954] and varimax [Kaiser,
                                                                                                ∗
1958], which simplify the rows and columns, respectively, of the loading matrix. If we define L̂ (m) = L̂(m)R,
then in the tensorial setting, quartimax maximizes
                                                   K
                                                   X
                                                            (L̂∗k )4       ,                                 (11)
                                                                       F
                                                   k=1

while varimax maximizes
                                           K
                                           X                                   2
                                                 (L̂∗k )4        − (L̂∗k )2        ,                         (12)
                                                             F                 F
                                           k=1

both with respect to R. Practically, maximizing (11) and (12) is equivalent to applying multivariate quar-
timax and varimax to L̂, respectively.

3.2.2   Oblique Rotation
If one wishes to discover a structure simpler than that found by orthogonal rotation and is not constrained
to studying uncorrelated (on average) functional factors, then one should use oblique rotation. Each oblique


                                                             10
rotation scheme identifies some K̂-by-K̂ invertible matrix T satisfying diag(T T T ) = I that rotates the
loading matrix towards a structure amenable to interpretation. Among the most popular is direct oblimin
rotation [Jennrich and Sampson, 1966] which encourages simplicity while controlling factor correlation. If
we define L̂∗k (m) = L̂k (m)T −1 , then in the tensorial setting, direct oblimin minimizes
                                 X
                                       (L̂∗k )2 (L̂∗k )2       − α (L̂∗k )2       (L̂∗k )2        ,      (13)
                                                           F                  F              F
                                k<k′

as a function of T , where α controls the degree to which factors are correlated. When α is zero, the factors
are maximally correlated, and direct oblimin is called quartimin. As α takes on increasingly negative values,
the factors become less correlated. Generally, one should avoid using positive values of α as this may produce
degenerate solutions. In practice, we minimize (13) by applying multivariate direct oblimin rotation to L̂.

3.3     Postprocessing
After selecting a useful representation of the global subspace, we may (optionally) postprocess this repre-
sentation via smoothing and shrinkage. These steps can refine the estimate of the global spatial covariance
and lead to more interpretable representations.

3.3.1   Smoothing
Since the objective of (9) ignores contaminated on-band elements of the empirical covariance, its minimization
implicitly smooths the initial L̂k . In practice, however, these estimates may still be too rough, and could
benefit from explicit smoothing. Stanley et al. [2025] encourage such smoothness by adding a roughness
penalty to their objective function. We instead recommend smoothing the rotated L̂∗k as a postprocessing
step. Though less streamlined than the strategy of Stanley et al. [2025], postprocessed smoothing allows
users to more easily achieve different levels of smoothness for each loading. We opt to smooth each loading
independently with a Gaussian filter that applies one-dimensional convolutions along each spatial dimension.
Component-wise smoothness is controlled by scale parameters σk that set the standard deviation of the
Gaussian kernels used in each one-dimensional convolution. Section 3 of the supplement describes how to
tune these σk via cross-validation. Henceforth, we let L̃k denote the kth rotated loading after smoothing.

3.3.2   Shrinkage
Rotation induces a “simple” loading structure which, roughly speaking, is achieved when there are many
low-magnitude weights and relatively few high-magnitude weights. However, some applications call for a
“sparse” loading structure in which many weights are not just low-magnitude, but are actually set to zero.
This is arguably the case in FC wherein it is useful to know which brain regions are not activated by a latent
factor. Our shrinkage procedure attains sparsity by adaptively soft-thresholding the smooth rotated L̃k :
                                                                           
                         L̄k (m) = sgn L̃k (m) max L̃k (m) − κk w L̃k (m) , 0 ,

                                                                                             −2
where w(·) is a weight function with positive support (e.g., w(x) = |x| ), and the κk > 0 are shrinkage
parameters which may be tuned via cross-validation as described in Section 3 of the supplement.

3.4     Factor Score Estimation
Though the discretized factors F1 , . . . , FK̂ ∈ RJ are random, and not parameters in the usual sense, their
estimates, called factor scores, can be quite informative. In fMRI, these estimates track the subject-specific
activity of estimated spatial maps throughout a scan. They can also serve as inputs to diagnostic tests that
evaluate the suitability of the assumption in (2), that the factors are uncorrelated with unit variance on
average.
    We use techniques from functional regression to compute factor scores. Let us temporarily return to the
infinite-resolution TFFM, but fix the spatial location at one of the discrete spatial observation points sm


                                                                11
and swap out the true loadings lk evaluated at that point for the postprocessed estimates L̄k . The resulting
model may be written as
                                               XK̂
                                      Xm (t) =     L̄k,m Fk (t) + ϵm (t),
                                                  k=1

where Xm (t) = X(sm , t), L̄k,m = L̄k (m), and ϵm (t) = ϵ(sm , t). That is, the infinite-resolution TFFM be-
comes a function-on-scalar (F-on-S) regression model where Xm is the functional response indexed discretely
over space, the L̄k,m are viewed as scalar predictors, and the Fk are the functional parameters to be esti-
mated. In Section 4.1 of the supplement, we describe a F-on-S method for estimating these Fk that is similar
to the one outlined in Section 13.4.5 of Ramsay and Silverman [2005]. We control the smoothness of the
estimates via a component-wise tuning parameter γ that may be selected using the spatial cross-validation
procedure described in Section 4.2 of the supplement. With these functional estimates at hand, one need
only evaluate each F̂k on T to obtain estimates for the discrete Fk .

3.4.1    A Diagnostic for the Orthogonal TFFM
One may use factor score estimates F̂i ∈ RK̂×J , i = 1, . . . , n, to validate the assumption in (2) of the
orthogonal model, that the factors are, on average, uncorrelated with unit variance. If this assumption
holds, then one would expect
                                             n
                                          1 X
                                                F̂i F̂iT ≈ I K̂×K̂ .
                                         nJ i=1
In Sections 5, we employ this diagnostic to assess the suitability of the orthogonal TFFM when applied to
resting-state fMRI data.


4       Simulation Studies
We now investigate the efficacy of our methodology through three simulation studies. In the first, we compare
the accuracy of our postprocessed estimator for the global spatial covariance to that of several competing
estimators. In the second, we highlight the different ways in which select methods express the estimated
global subspace via the empirical loadings. In the third, we study the performance of our methodology for
factor score estimation in various settings. We begin, in Section 4.1, by outlining the data generating process
used across these studies.

4.1     Data Simulation
For each study, we simulate data from a TFFM with spatial dimension equal to two, and simplify designs
by setting M = M1 = M2 and δ = δ1 = δ2 . We simulate n i.i.d. mean-zero functions Yi (s, t) and n
i.i.d. mean-zero functions ϵi (s, t) on an evenly spaced M × M × J lattice in [0, 1]3 , and summarize these
discretizations with the order-3 tensors Y (i) and ϵ(i) , respectively. We sum these components to get the
samples X (i) = Y (i) + ϵ(i) , then calculate the empirical spatial covariance tensor
                                                     n   J
                                                  1 X X (i)     (i)
                                          Cˆns =           X ⊗ Xj ,
                                                 nJ i=1 j=1 j

         (i)
where Xj ∈ RM ×M is the 2-dimensional spatial image at the jth time point.
                                                            PK
     To simulate the functions Yi , we set Yi (s, t) =        k=1 ck zk (s)fik (t), where the zk are (possibly non-
orthogonal) functions scaled to unit norm, the ck are positive constants, and the fik are (in the orthogonal
case) i.i.d. realizations of a zero-mean Gaussian process with squared exponential kernel having length
parameter ωf (n.b., such factors will have pointwise unit variance). In the oblique case, we rotate f i =
[fi,1 , . . . fi,K ] by some invertible matrix T satisfying diag(T T T ) = I to induce the covariance H = T T T
among the factors. The kth loading function is decomposed into its normalization zk and a scaling constant
ck to make some loadings functions more difficult to estimate than others. Moreover, the (ck , zk ) are not


                                                         12
necessarily equal to the eigen-pairs (λk , ηk ) of the global spatial covariance G , as we do not require that
the zk are orthogonal. Throughout these studies, we consider the three loading schemes depicted in Figure
3. In the first scheme (denoted by BI), each zk is defined piecewise with a bump function in two regions
of its domain, and is zero elsewhere. Each zk in the second scheme (denoted by NET) is also defined by
piecewise bump functions, but their arrangement mimics that of known resting-state networks (e.g., default
mode, executive, right dorsal visual stream, left dorsal visual stream). In the third loading scheme (denoted
by TRI), each zk is defined by three bump functions, one of which is larger than the others.




                                (a) BI                                      (b) NET




                                                     (c) TRI

                  Figure 3: The three loading schemes used throughout simulation studies.
                                                      PP
    To simulate the functions ϵi , we set ϵi (s, t) = j=1 aij vij (s)uij (t), where the uij are i.i.d. realizations
of a zero-mean Gaussian process with squared exponential kernel having length parameter ωu , the aij are
positive constants, and P >> K. Furthermore, the (possibly non-orthogonal) vij are 2-dimensional bump
functions scaled to unit norm with support contained by [(p − 1)δ, pδ] × [(q − 1)δ, qδ] where p and q are chosen
so that the intersection of this product with [0, 1]2 is non-empty. Note that the local spatial covariance may
be different for each subject.
    In all simulations, we set the number of time points J = 500, a number close to that of the AOMIC
resting-state data (where, after pre-processing, J = 470). Moreover, we set the length parameters ωf = 0.02
and ωu = 0.002 as this results in relative global-local temporal smoothness that roughly mimics that of
resting-state cognitive processes and low-frequency noise. Finally, the way in which we choose the loading
coefficients ck and error coefficients aij determines the “regime” of a simulation and impacts the difficulty of
estimation. Throughout these studies, we make use of two regimes, the second presenting a more challenging
estimation problem than the first. In both regimes, the aij are distributed uniformly in [0.1, 1], while the ck
are distributed uniformly in [2, 3] and [0.8, 1.8] in regimes one and two, respectively.



                                                        13
4.2    Study 1: Global Covariance Estimation
The goal of our first study is to compare the accuracy of our postprocessed estimator (denoted by TFFA)
to that of several other global covariance estimators:
  1. TFFA without shrinkage (denoted by MCS, for marix completion with smoothing).

  2. TFFA with neither smoothing nor shrinkage (denoted by MC, for matrix completion).
  3. Independent component analysis with smoothing (denoted by ICAS): after pre-smoothing the data
     using a Gaussian filter, we estimate G s by extracting from
                                                             P the data an M × M × K tensor Ŝ of
     independent components via MELODIC, then compute k Sˆk ⊗ Sˆk where the M × M matrix Sˆk is
     the kth estimated independent component.

  4. ICAS without pre-smoothing (denoted by ICA).
     For TFFA, MCS and ICAS, we must select smoothing and (possibly) shrinkage parameters prior to
model estimation. To accomplish this, we utilize the cross-validation procedures outlined in Section 3 of the
supplement, setting the number of folds equal to three. We expedite tuning by replacing component-wise
hyperparameters (e.g., σ and κ) with single parameters applied to each component (e.g., σ and κ). When
estimating via TFFA, MCS, or MC, we set the bandwidth equal to 0.1, even when the true bandwidth is
smaller.
     The study evaluates each estimator in 48 scenarios, each defined by a loading scheme (BI or NET),
number of factors (2 or 4), bandwidth (0.05 or 0.1), regime (1 or 2), and number of subjects (5, 10, or 20).
For 100 repetitions of each scenario, we use each of the five estimators to compute an estimate x of the global
spatial covariance G s then compute normalized errors E(x) = ∥G s − x∥F /∥G s ∥F . To quantify the relative
performance of the TFFA estimator, we form relative errors by dividing the normalized errors for the MCS,
MC, ICAS, and ICA estimators by that for the TFFA estimator. Figure 4 displays results for all scenarios.
     In nearly every scenario, TFFA furnishes the most accurate global covariance estimates. The benefits of
shrinkage and smoothing (quantified by the gaps between the dotted line and MCS errors, and MCS and
MC errors, respectively) are consistently present in BI scenarios but more sporadic in NET scenarios. This
is likely because the universal smoothing parameters used in this study are poorly suited to the NET scheme
whose loadings display variable sparsity and smoothness. This suggests that practitioners should opt for
component-wise tuning when compute time is not a concern.
     The ICA-based estimators generally lag behind the others, although pre-smoothing (quantified by the
difference between ICAS and ICA errors) is sometimes quite helpful, particularly in the second regime. In
this regime, the benefits of pre-smoothing are most pronounced when δ = 0.05 but less so when δ = 0.1.
This is because smoothing the data smears more unwanted local variation into the global covariance in
high-bandwidth scenarios.

4.3    Study 2: Global Covariance Expression
In our second study, we examine how various methods express their target subspace and comment on the
alignment of these expressions with the ground truth. To do so, we examine output from orthogonal TFFA,
oblique TFFA, and ICAS when data arise from orthogonal and oblique TFFMs, and model dimension is
correctly specified (i.e., K̂ = K). In Section 5.1 of the supplement, we explore the implications of dimension
overspecification (i.e., K̂ > K). Throughout, we consider regime-two scenarios with loading scheme set to
TRI, K set to 8, n set to 20, and δ set to 0.1.
    When data arise from an orthogonal model, estimates from all three methods are in close alignment with
the true loading functions, while those from both TFFA methods possess sparse structure that facilitates
interpretation (see Figure 5). It is worth noting that despite employing an oblique rotation procedure, oblique
TFFA is nonetheless able to recover the loadings of an orthogonal model since every orthogonal rotation is
also a permissible oblique rotation. When data are generated from an oblique model, output from TFFA
and ICAS is in reasonable alignment with the ground truth, but that from orthogonal TFFA is noticeably
less simple than the true loadings (see Figure 6). In fact, since the space of orthogonal rotations is a strict
(and comparatively tiny) subset of oblique rotations, oblique algorithms will, in general, discover simpler


                                                      14
Figure 4: Mean relative errors (with ±2-standard-deviation error bars) for all scenarios using the TFFA
estimator as baseline.


structure than orthogonal algorithms. It is thus advisable, at least when K is known, to favor oblique TFFA
over orthogonal TFFA unless one wishes to study only uncorrelated factors.

4.4    Study 3: Factor Score Estimation
The third and final study evaluates the performance of our methodology for factor score estimation. Recall
that to compute a subject’s factor scores, we treat the postprocessed loadings as fixed predictors, view
the subject’s factors as functional parameters, then estimate these factors via function-on-scalar (F-on-S)
regression. To ensure that error incurred during loading estimation does not contaminate this study, we
replace the postprocessed loadings in the usual procedure with the true ones.
    Throughout this section, we consider regime-one data simulated from an orthogonal TFFM on a 40-by-
40 grid using the BI loading scheme with K = 2 and n = 20. We evaluate factor score estimation in six
scenarios, each given by the height h (20, 30, or 40 pixels) of a square mask centered within the 40-by-40
grid outside of which pixels are ignored, and a bandwidth δ (0.05 or 0.1).
    To isolate the effect of smoothing, we compare our approach (denoted by FOSR, for F-on-S regression)
to one that estimates the factors at each time point independently (denoted by PWLS, for pointwise least
squares). For 10 repetitions of each (h, δ) combination, we estimate factor scores via FOSR and PWLS. We
then compute nK reconstruction errors for each repetition by evaluating Eik (x) = ∥F ik − x∥F ∥F ik ∥F at
the ith subject’s kth factor score estimate x, for i = 1, . . . , n and k = 1, . . . K. Figure 7 plots these errors



                                                        15
                                              (a) Orthogonal TFFA




                                                (b) Oblique TFFA




                                                    (c) ICAS

Figure 5: Estimates for order-8 models when data are generated from an orthogonal model in scenario of
Study 2.


for each scenario and method.
    In all scenarios, FOSR errors are substantially smaller than PWLS errors, providing clear evidence for the
benefits of smoothing. Moreover, the estimates for both methods improve as h increases. In fMRI, increasing
h is analogous to analyzing a larger region of the brain (i.e., expanding a study’s brain mask). Note that
this is not equivalent to increasing the spatial resolution of a fixed region, which only slightly increases the
effective sample size and thus has little effect on the quality of factor score estimates. However, estimates for
both methods degrade as δ increases. This is because neither method accounts for spatial autocorrelation
among the residuals. One could address this by instead minimizing some generalized least squares criterion,
but this would necessitate the inversion of a large spatial error covariance, an intractable task in our fMRI


                                                       16
                                             (a) Orthogonal TFFA




                                              (b) Oblique TFFA




                                                   (c) ICAS

Figure 6: Estimates for order-8 models when data are generated from an oblique model in scenario of Study
2.


application.


5    AOMIC Analysis
We now turn to the AOMIC-PIOP1 dataset which includes six-minute resting-state scans for 210 healthy
university students. Before each subject’s resting-state session, a structural image was acquired at a resolu-
tion of 1 mm isotropic. A functional image was then acquired at a spatial resolution of 3 mm isotropic and a
temporal resolution of 0.75 seconds. Preprocessing of anatomical and functional MRI were performed using



                                                     17
Figure 7: Factor reconstruction errors for the FOSR and PWLS estimators for each combination of h and δ.


a standard Fmriprep pipeline [Esteban et al., 2019], as detailed in Snoek et al. [2021].
    We conducted three additional preprocessing steps to prepare these data for analysis via our method-
ology. To start, we discarded the first ten volumes from each subject’s scan as these often contained large
signal fluctuations due to scanner instability. Next, we used FMRIB’s ICA-based X-noiseifier (FIX; Salimi-
Khorshidi et al., 2014, Griffanti et al., 2014) to remove lingering noise components (e.g., head movement,
respiratory motion, and scanner artifacts) from each subject’s scan that remained after Fmriprep processing.
This involved (i) performing single-subject ICA via MELODIC for all 210 subjects, (ii) manually labeling
noise components for 10 subjects, (iii) training the FIX classifier on this hand-labeled data, (iv) automatically
identifying noise components with this classifier for the remaining 200 subjects, then (v) regressing out noise
components from each subject’s scan. When hand-labeling ICA components, we adhered to well-established
criteria described in Griffanti et al. [2014]. FIX denoising is now a workhorse technique in the neuroimaging
literature, and has been incorporated into several major data preparation pipelines, like those of the Hu-
man Connectome Project [Glasser et al., 2016]. Finally, to prevent high-variation voxels from dominating
analysis, we applied variance normalization to all voxels time courses.
    This section presents an analysis of the full 210-subject dataset while Section 6.2 of the supplement con-
siders only the first 20 subjects, a size typical of small-scale fMRI studies. We begin analysis by constructing
a mask that contains only the roughly M = 54, 000 voxels that lie within the brain of all 210 subjects.
Voxels outside this mask are henceforth ignored. We then compute only the entries of the empirical average
spatial covariance Cˆs needed to fit the TFFM: entries for pairs of voxels that (i) lie within the brain mask,
and (ii) are separated by a distance of δ = 0.1 following transformation of volume dimensions to [0, 1]3 .
This covariance computation is performed in a batched and distributed manner to avoid memory limits
and accelerate computation. Using the scree plot procedure, we then set the number of factors K̂ equal to
nine (see Figure 7A of the supplement for scree and ratio plots) and estimate loadings via our distributed
algorithm, storing these estimates as a matrix L̂ ∈ RM ×K̂ . After separately applying both orthogonal (vari-
                                                                                                                ∗
max) and oblique (quartimin) procedures, we smooth and shrink each column of the rotated matrices L̂
independently–choosing σ and κ via 3-fold cross-validation–to obtain the final postprocessed estimators L̄
(see Figure 8). Lastly, we compute factor scores for both models via our F-on-S approach–tuning γ via
4-fold spatial cross-validation–then estimate “on average” factor covariances which we visualize as heatmaps
in Figure 9.
    Known resting-state networks are clearly present in the loading estimates of Figure 8. For instance,
much of the oft-studied “default mode network” (see 420 of Figure 1 in Smith et al. [2009]) may be found in


                                                       18
                        (a) Orthogonal TFFA                           (b) Oblique TFFA

Figure 8: Loading estimates for the orthogonal and oblique TFFMs fit to data from 210 AOMIC subjects.


the second empirical loading tensor of both models. Other well-known networks, like those associated with
visual (see 120 , 220 , and 320 of Figure 1 in Smith et al. [2009]) and auditory (720 ) processing are present in
the first and fourth loading estimates, respectively, of both models.
    Oblique rotation discovers noticeably simpler structures than does orthogonal rotation. For instance,
the first loading in Figure 9a shares many of the structures found in the first loading of Figure 9b, yet the



                                                       19
                   (a) Orthogonal TFFA                                      (b) Oblique TFFA

Figure 9: Diagnostic heatmaps displaying pairwise factor covariances for the 210-subject analysis. For the
orthogonal diagnostic, an asterisk indicates that the covariance (or variance) differs significantly from zero (or
one) at the 0.05 level without correcting for multiple testing. The two flagged comparisons are insignificant
after application of a Bonferroni correction.


latter has more regions that have been rotated towards zero. The same holds for many other loading pairs.
This was expected as the much larger space of oblique rotations promotes discovery of simpler structures. In
discovering such structure, the oblique rotation used in this analysis induced the factor correlations shown
in Figure 9b. Meanwhile, Figure 9a suggests that orthogonal rotation largely preserved uncorrelated factors.
    To provide a comparison, we present IC estimates for a 9-component ICA model fit to unsmoothed data
from all 210 AOMIC subjects (see Figure 10). These estimates are remarkably similar to those of oblique
TFFA, as was expected given our observations from the simulation study of Section 4.3 of the manuscript.
Of course, the advantage of our framework is that, unlike ICA, we are free to entertain other representations
of the target subspace.


6    Discussion
This paper builds upon Stanley et al. [2025], delivering a comprehensive new approach to studying FC. We
began by updating the model of Stanley et al. [2025] to account for the temporal dependencies present in
fMRI data. We then invoked the distributed LRCMC algorithm of Stanley et al. [2025+] to scale estimation
of the global spatial covariance to the full brain. After exploring the global subspace via factor rotation and
postprocessing the rotated loadings via smoothing and shrinkage, we computed factor scores using F-on-S
regression techniques. The result is TFFA, an LLVM-based approach that (1) defines the target subspace
as describing all sustained global spatial variation, then (2) rotates an initial expression of this subspace to
optimize a user-specified criterion.
    Users of our approach should follow a couple of practical guidelines. First, data smoothing should not
precede our approach as it does for other FC methods. Pre-smoothing would smear local variation into the
global signal, thereby corrupting subsequent attempts to estimate that signal. Second, when the number of
factors is known (or can be reliably estimated), we recommend using oblique rotations unless there is one
wishes to study only uncorrelated factors. Oblique rotations tend to discover simpler structure and, because
they are a superset of orthogonal rotations, can still recover orthogonal factors.
    Throughout this work, we have emphasized the utility of TFFA as an exploratory tool. By leveraging
the vast suite of rotation algorithms developed for classical FA, TFFA enables investigation of its target
subspace, and insights from such exploration may inform hypothesis-driven research. However, we placed
less emphasis on TFFA as a dimension reduction tool, particularly one whose output could serve as input to


                                                       20
            Figure 10: IC estimates for the ICA model fit to data from 210 AOMIC subjects.


other analyses. For example, one could use subject-wise factor scores as features in classification problems
or as predictors in regression frameworks. The use of TFFA output in downstream analyses presents several
potentially fruitful lines of research.
    The main drawback of TFFA is that it relies on a massive voxel-by-voxel spatial covariance and thus
requires access to a high-performance computing environment. While this may seem a reasonable prereq-
uisite, its direct competitors–namely, ICA–are lightweight enough to run on personal computers. Lowering
the computational overhead of TFFA may hasten its adoption among practitioners.


                                                    21
    Supplement: Temporal Functional Factor Analysis of
                   Brain Connectivity


1     Data Availability and Computer Code
The links below may be used to access both the AOMIC-PIOP1 dataset which is publicly available on
OpenNeuro and code for reproducing the results of this paper which is hosted on GitHub.

      Data: https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds002785/versions/2.0.0
      Code: https://github.com/kylestanley1313/ffa-p2


2     Transformational Indeterminacy
In this section, we describe why the orthogonal and oblique TFFMs are identifiable only up to orthonormal
and invertible transformations, respectively. We present explanations in the infinite-resolution setting, omit-
ting parallel finite-resolution discussions since the details are similar. In what follows, we condense notation
by defining

                                                l(s) = [l1 (s), . . . , lK (s)], and
                                               F (t) = [F1 (t), . . . , FK (t)].

Explanations in both settings will make use of the following spectral decomposition:
                                                       K
                                                       X
                                      g s (s, s′ ) =         λk ηk (s)ηk (s′ ) = η̃(s)T η̃(s′ ),                            (1A)
                                                       k=1

               1/2
where η̃k = λk ηk denotes the kth scaled eigenfunction of g s . If the global term Y (s, t) may be expressed
using these scaled eigenfunctions,
                                                   K
                                                   X
                                        Y (s, t) =   η̃k (s)ck (t),
                                                                     k=1
      s
then g takes the form
                        X Z                                              X Z                    
                                                                                                     1/2 1/2
                ′                                                ′
           s
          g (s, s ) =          E[c2k (t)]dt    λk ηk (s)ηk (s ) +                 E[ck (t)cj (t)]dt λk λj ηk (s)ηj (s′ ).
                        k                                                  k̸=j

For (1A) to hold, we require that
                                                       Z
                                                           E[c(t)c(t)T ]dt = I.

Hence, the scaled eigenfunctions η̃k and the functional coefficients ck serve as the loadings and factors, re-
spectively, in a valid orthogonal TFFM. We invoke this fact in our discussions of transformational ambiguities
in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.

2.1    The Orthogonal Model
Recall that the global spatial covariance in the orthogonal TFFM decomposes as

                                                       gs (s, s′ ) = l(s)T l(s′ ).                                          (2A)



                                                                      22
Upon examination of (1A) and (2A), it becomes clear that rotating the scaled eigenfunctions η̃k by some
orthonormal matrix R recovers the loading functions lk :

                                                   l(s) = η̃(s)R.

However, any rotation of valid loadings (e.g., the scaled eigenfunctions) are equivalent under the model when
paired with a corresponding rotation of the factors. To understand this ambiguity, suppose l(s) and F (t)
jointly satisfy assumptions of the orthogonal TFFM. Let R be some K-by-K orthonormal matrix, and define
rotations of the loadings and factors as follows: l∗ (s) = l(s)R and F ∗ (t) = F (t)R. First, rotation preserves
the global component Y :
                                      K
                                      X
                                            lk∗ (s)Fk∗ (t) = l∗ (s)[F ∗ (t)]T
                                      k=1
                                                         = l(s)R[f (t)R]T
                                                         = l(s)RRT [F (t)]T
                                                         = l(s)[F (t)]T
                                                         = Y (s, t)

Second, the rotated factors are still, on average, uncorrelated with unit variance:
                  Z h                   i         Z h               i 
                           ∗   T ∗              T
                     E [F (t)] F (t) dt = R           E [F (t)] F (t) dt R = RT IR = I
                                                               T



Therefore, the model is preserved under orthogonal rotation of the factors and loadings.

2.2    The Oblique Model
Recall that in the oblique TFFM, the global spatial covariance decomposes as

                                             gs (s, s′ ) = l(s)T Hl(s′ ).                                  (3A)

Let H = V ΛV T be the eigendecomposition of H. It is easy to show that the ˜l = lV Λ1/2 and F̃ =
Λ−1/2 V T F comprise the loadings and factors, respectively, of an orthogonal TFFM. As before, one may
recover the loadings ˜lk of this orthogonal model by some orthogonal rotation R of the scaled eigenfunctions:
                                                       ˜l = η̃R.                                           (4A)

The true loadings lk of the oblique model may then be obtained by reversing the orthogonalizing transfor-
mation:
                                             l = ˜lΛ−1/2 V T                                        (5A)
Combining (4A) and (5A) gives an invertible transformation T = V Λ1/2 RT whose inverse recovers the
loadings from the scaled eigenfunctions:
                                             l = η̃T −1 .
It is easy to show that, given our constraint on the diagonal elements of H, this transformation T satisfies
the constraint diag(T T T ) = I. As we note in the manuscript, the oblique model admits more ambiguity
than the orthogonal one. Not only may R be replaced by any orthonormal matrix, but since H is unknown,
we cannot use its eigendecomposition to fix the last two matrices in the expression for T .


3     Postprocessing Tuning Procedures
To postprocess the rotated loading estimates L̂∗k , we must select smoothing and shrinkage parameters: σ
and κ. This is accomplished by separately applying one round of cross-validation to choose σ and another
to choose κ. We recommend smoothing before shrinkage as this order generally leads to sparser estimates.


                                                           23
In what follows, suppose the data X1 , . . . , Xn have been partitioned into V folds of (nearly) equal size, and
understand that a quantity with (v) (resp., (−v)) in its superscript denotes one computed using only data
from fold v (resp., all data except those in fold v). Throughout, we will also assume that all fold-wise loading
                    (−v)
estimates (e.g., (L̂k )∗ ) have been properly aligned with their full data counterparts (e.g., L̂∗k ) so that
component-wise tuning parameters are applied to the correct components across folds. In practice, one may
need to use target rotations to achieve suitable alignment. Finally, we define the following error function
                                                                                  2
                                                                K̂
                                                                  X
                               Err v; {Lk }K̂
                                           k=1 = Z ◦
                                                     Cˆ(v) −           Lk ⊗ L k         ,
                                                                  k=1
                                                                                      F

where we have dropped the s from the empirical spatial covariance for fold v to simplify notation.

Tuning σ (orthogonal): Suppose that we have obtained the L̂∗k by applying an orthogonal rotation
R ∈ RK̂×K̂ to the L̂k . We may use the following cross-validation procedure to choose σ ∗ :

  1. For each candidate value of σ:
                                        (−v)                             (−v) ∗
      (a) For each v, shrink the (L̃k )∗ using σ to obtain the (L̃k          ) (σ).
                                                             
                                PV              (−v)
      (b) Compute CV (σ) = V1 v=1 Err v; {(L̃k )∗ (σ)}K̂  k=1

  2. Set σ ∗ = argmin CV (σ).
                     σ


Tuning σ (oblique): Suppose that we have obtained the L̂∗k by applying an oblique rotation T ∈ RK̂×K̂
to the L̂k . To choose σ ∗ , we apply the following cross-validation procedure:
  1. For each candidate value of σ:

      (a) For each v:
                               (−v) ∗                          (−v) ∗
             i. Shrink the (L̃k    ) using σ to obtain the (L̃k    ) (σ).
                               (−v)                                                  (−v)
            ii.   Obtain the L̃k (σ) by applying the oblique rotation T −1 to the (L̃k )∗ (σ). This effectively
             reverts the original oblique rotation, ensuring that the factors are (approximately) orthogonal
             prior to computing the global spatial covariance in (b).
                                                             
                                PV               (−v)
      (b) Compute CV (σ) = V1 v=1 Err v; {L̃k (σ)}K̂      k=1

  2. Set σ ∗ = argmin CV (σ).
                     σ


Tuning κ (orthogonal): Suppose that we have obtained the L̃∗k by applying an orthogonal rotation
R ∈ RK̂×K̂ to the L̂k then smoothing. We may use the following cross-validation procedure to choose κ∗ :

  1. For each candidate value of κ:
                                        (−v)                             (−v) ∗
      (a) For each v, shrink the (L̃k )∗ using κ to obtain the (L̃k          ) (κ).
                                                             
                                PV              (−v)
      (b) Compute CV (κ) = V1 v=1 Err v; {(L̃k )∗ (κ)}K̂  k=1

  2. Set κ∗ = argmin CV (κ).
                     κ




                                                       24
Tuning κ (oblique): Suppose that we have obtained the L̃∗k by applying an oblique rotation T ∈ RK̂×K̂
to the L̂k then smoothing. To choose κ∗ , we apply the following cross-validation procedure:
    1. For each candidate value of κ:
       (a) For each v:
                                (−v) ∗                          (−v) ∗
             i. Shrink the (L̃k     ) using κ to obtain the (L̃k    ) (κ).
                                (−v)                                                  (−v)
             ii.   Obtain the L̃k (κ) by applying the oblique rotation T −1 to the (L̃k )∗ (κ). This effectively
              reverts the original oblique rotation, ensuring that the factors are (approximately) orthogonal
              prior to computing the global spatial covariance in (b).
                                                              
                                 PV               (−v)
       (b) Compute CV (κ) = V1 v=1 Err v; {L̃k (κ)}K̂      k=1

    2. Set κ∗ = argmin CV (κ).
                      κ



4     Factor Score Estimation
Recall from the manuscript that factor scores are estimated by fixing the postprocessed loadings L̄k within
the TFFM then invoking function-on-scalar (F-on-S) regression techniques. In this section, we derive the
factor score estimator then present a technique for tuning its smoothness parameter. Throughout, we simplify
notation by defining L ∈ RM ×K̂ to be the matrix whose kth column is the vectorization of L̄k .

4.1     Derivation of Factor Score Estimator
Let X ∈ RM ×J , M = M1 . . . MD , be the matrix of voxel time courses whose jth column is given by the
vectorization of the brain volume at time point j. We assume each Fk (t) lies in the span of some truncated
basis {e1 (t), . . . , eP (t)}:
                                                    P
                                                    X
                                           Fk (t) =    akp ep (t).
                                                       p=1

Using matrix notation, we assume F (t) = Ae(t) where e(t) = [e1 (t), . . . , eP (t)]T and A ∈ AK̂×P is the
matrix of basis coefficients given by (A)kp = akp . Estimating F (t) thus amounts to estimating A, which we
accomplish via penalized least squares:
                                                                         E 
                                           1             2
                                                               D
                                 arg min     ∥X − LAE∥F + γ AT A, D                                    (6A)
                                 A∈RK̂×P   2                               F

where E ∈ RP ×J is the matrix of discretized basis functions      E (E)pj = ep (tj ), D ∈ R
                                                          D given by
                                                                                           P ×P
                                                                                                is the matrix
                                                               ′′   ′′
of second derivative inner products given by (D)p1 ,p2 = ep1 , ep2           , and γ > 0 is a tuning parameter. The
                                                                         2
first term in the objective of (6A) quantifies the distance between the observations and global components,
while the second penalizes roughness in the Fk . Differentiating both terms with respect to A gives
                                 ∂L
                                      = −LT XE T + LT LAEE T , and
                                 ∂A
                                ∂P
                                      = AD.
                                 ∂A
The A minimizing (6A) is thus the solution to
                                     0 = −LT XE T + LT LAEE T + γIAD.
After rearranging terms, invoking the identity
                            vec(A1 BC T1 + A2 BC T2 ) = (C 1 ⊗ A1 + C 2 ⊗ A2 )vec(B),
then rearranging terms once more, one arrives at the estimate of A:
                                                           −1               
                       vec(Â) = EE T ⊗ (L̄)T L̄ + D ⊗ γI        vec (L̄)T XE T .                             (7A)


                                                        25
4.2      Tuning γ
The estimator for A depends on a smoothing parameter γ (or γ for non-uniform smoothness) that must
be tuned. To accomplish this, we use a spatial V -fold cross-validation procedure that selects an optimal
parameter γ ∗ from a collection of candidates {γn }N
                                                   n=1 . The basic idea is to create (nearly) independent folds
by blocking space.

    1. Partition the rows of X ∈ RM ×J (resp., L ∈ RM ×K̂ ) into V folds of (roughly) equal size so that
       the rows in each fold correspond to voxels that are spatially contiguous. Let X (v) ∈ RMv ×J (resp.,
       L(v) ∈ RMv ×K̂ ) be the data (resp., loading) matrix for the vth fold, and X (−v) ∈ R(M −Mv )×J (resp.,
       L(−v) ∈ R(M −Mv )×K̂ ) be the data (resp., loading) matrix for all but the vth fold.
    2. For n = 1, . . . , N :

        (a) For v = 1, . . . , V :
                                                                               (j,−v)          (j,−v)
                i. Estimate factor scores using all but the vth fold: F̂                = Â            E where
                                                             T                −1           T         
                                (j,−v)
                                                        
                       vec(Â            )=       EE T ⊗ L(−v) L(−v) + D ⊗ γj I     vec    L(−v) X (−v) E T .

                                                                                         (j,−v)
               ii. Compute the reconstruction error for the vth fold using F̂                     :
                                                                                              2
                                                                                     (j,−v)
                                                        ejv = Mv−1 X (v) − L(v) F̂                .
                                                                                              F

        (b) Compute ej = V −1
                                         P
                                          v ejv .

    3. Set γ ∗ equal to the γj furnishing the minimum Ej .

Throughout the manuscript, we tune γ using four-fold spatial cross-validation. When the data are comprised
of spatial “volumes” that take values in [0, 1]2 (as in our simulation study) these four folds are demarcated
by the lines x = 1/2 and y = 1/2. When volumes take values in [0, 1]3 (as in our data analysis) the four
folds are delimited by the planes x = 1/2 and y = 1/2.


5      Simulation Studies
This section presents supplementary material from the simulation study of the manuscript.

5.1      Study 2: Global Covariance Expression Under Dimension Overspecification
In this section, we study subspace expression when model dimension is overspecified (i.e., K̂ > K). As
in Section 4.3 of the manuscript, we consider regime-two scenarios with loading scheme set to TRI, K set
to 8, n set to 20, and δ set to 0.1. This time, however, we set K̂ = 25. Figures 1A, 2A, and 3A present
loading estimates for orthogonal TFFA, oblique TFFA, and ICAS, respectively, when data are generated from
an orthogonal TFFM. The loadings estimated via orthogonal TFFA are most closely aligned to the truth,
and include many trailing loadings that have been shrunk to zero. Although oblique TFFA captures much
ground truth structure, its presentation is messier than that of orthogonal TFFA. This is because, in pursuit
of simple structure, the more flexible oblique rotation algorithm splinters single-factor signals across multiple
loadings (e.g., k = 5, 17, 21 and k = 6, 14). Moreover, subsequent postprocessing more cautiously smooths
and shrinks trailing loadings that contain these signal fragments, which prevents the convenient zeroing out
achieved by orthogonal TFFA. Thankfully, it is rather easy to spot this fragmentation of global structure
since all non-global structure has been eliminated. The same cannot be said of ICAS which splinters global
structure among local structure (which is included in the target subspace), resulting in an indecipherable
soup of global-local variation.



                                                                 26
Figure 1A: Estimates for the order-25 orthogonal TFFA model when data are generated from an orthogonal
model in scenario of Study 2.


    The takeaways are similar when the data are generated from an oblique TFFM (see Figures 4A, 5A, and
6A for loadings estimated by orthogonal TFFA, oblique TFFA, and ICAS, respectively). The main difference
is that, as when K is correctly specified, orthogonal TFFA sometimes combines signals from multiple factors
into a single loading (e.g., k = 1).
    This study suggests that orthogonal TFFA is robust to dimension overspecification when the factors are,
in fact, uncorrelated. However, if (i) factors are correlated and/or (ii) one uses an oblique TFFA, then model
dimension should be chosen carefully.




                                                     27
Figure 2A: Estimates for the order-25 oblique TFFA model when data are generated from an orthogonal
model in scenario of Study 2.




                                                28
Figure 3A: Estimates for the order-25 ICAS model when data are generated from an orthogonal model in
scenario of Study 2.




                                                29
Figure 4A: Estimates for the order-25 orthogonal TFFA model when data are generated from an oblique
model in scenario of Study 2.




                                                30
Figure 5A: Estimates for the order-25 oblique TFFA model when data are generated from an oblique model
in scenario of Study 2.




                                                 31
Figure 6A: Estimates for the order-25 ICAS model when data are generated from an oblique model in scenario
of Study 2.




                                                   32
6     AOMIC Analysis
This section contains spillover content from the 210-subject analysis of Section 5 of the manuscript, as well
as a 20-subject analysis whose size is closer to that of small-scale FC studies.

6.1    210-Subject Analysis
In the 210-subject analysis, we set the number of factors equal to nine, guided by the scree and ratio plots
of Figure 7A.




Figure 7A: The scree (left) and ratio (right) plot used to select the number of factors in the 210-subject
TFFMs.



6.2    20-Subject Analysis
In this Section, we use TFFA to study resting-state data from the first 20 AOMIC subjects. Many results
from this 20-subject analysis are in close alignment with those of the 210-subject analysis. We exclude
discussion of these similar findings to avoid redundancy, but highlight any noteworthy differences between
the two analyses.




Figure 8A: The scree (left) and ratio (right) plot used to select the number of factors in the 20-subject
TFFMs.

    After setting the number of factors to seven using the scree-plot approach (see Figure 8A), we estimate and
postprocess loadings for the orthogonal and oblique models (see Figure 9A). Though these loadings contain
much of the structure found in the 210-subject loadings, smoothing and (especially) shrinkage clearly has
a larger impact in the smaller study. This is, of course, not surprising. In most estimation problems, the
effects of regularization are stronger as sample size decreases.
    After obtaining the postprocessed loadings of Figure 9A, we compute factor scores for both models using
the F-on-S regression method outlined in Section 3.4 of the manuscript. The heatmaps of Figure 10A depict
empirical factor covariances for both models. As in the 210-subject study, oblique rotation clearly induces


                                                      33
                        (a) Orthogonal TFFA                          (b) Oblique TFFA

Figure 9A: Loading estimates for the orthogonal and oblique TFFMs fit to data from 20 AOMIC subjects.


correlation among the factors. However, the 20-subject orthogonal covariance seems to deviate more from
the identity than than that of the 210-subject study (see Figure 9a of the manuscript): several off-diagonal
elements are quite far from zero and the last diagonal element is nearly two. Yet the lack of asterisks in
the heatmap of Figure 10Aa indicate that the orthogonal covariance does not, in fact, differ significantly
from the identity. This initially counterintuitive result arises from the fact that there are fewer subjects in
this analysis, leading to higher-variance empirical factor covariances. Practitioners should be mindful of the
diminished sensitivity of diagnostic testing in such small studies.
     As in the 210-subject study, we provide a comparison to TFFA by fitting a 7-component ICA model to
the 20-subject data after smoothing each scan with a 1 mm Gaussian filter (see Figure 11A). The takeaway
is similar to that of the 210-subject analysis: ICA estimates are similar to those of oblique TFFA, but TFFA
allows users to more freely explore its target subspace.




                                                      34
                  (a) Orthogonal TFFA                                       (b) Oblique TFFA

Figure 10A: Diagnostic heatmaps displaying pairwise factor covariances for the 20-subject analysis. For
the orthogonal diagnostic, an asterisk (of which there are none) indicates that the covariance (or variance)
differs significantly from zero (or one) at the 0.05 level after correcting for multiple testing via a Bonferroni
adjustment.




                                                       35
Figure 11A: IC estimates for the ICA model fit to data from 20 AOMIC subjects.




                                     36
References
Christian F Beckmann and Stephen M Smith. Probabilistic independent component analysis for functional
  magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 23(2):137–152, 2004.
Bharat Biswal, F Zerrin Yetkin, Victor M Haughton, and James S Hyde. Functional connectivity in the
  motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar mri. Magnetic resonance in medicine, 34(4):
  537–541, 1995.
Charles George Broyden. The convergence of a class of double-rank minimization algorithms 1. general
  considerations. IMA Journal of Applied Mathematics, 6(1):76–90, 1970.
Yudong Chen and Martin J Wainwright. Fast low-rank estimation by projected gradient descent: General
  statistical and algorithmic guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.03025, 2015.
Marie-Hélène Descary and Victor M. Panaretos. Functional data analysis by matrix completion. The Annals
 of Statistics, 47(1):1 – 38, 2019. doi: 10.1214/17-AOS1590. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/17-AOS1590.
Oscar Esteban, Christopher J Markiewicz, Ross W Blair, Craig A Moodie, A Ilkay Isik, Asier Erramuzpe,
  James D Kent, Mathias Goncalves, Elizabeth DuPre, Madeleine Snyder, et al. fmriprep: a robust prepro-
  cessing pipeline for functional mri. Nature methods, 16(1):111–116, 2019.
Roger Fletcher. A new approach to variable metric algorithms. The computer journal, 13(3):317–322, 1970.
Karl J Friston. Functional and effective connectivity: a review. Brain connectivity, 1(1):13–36, 2011.
Karl J Friston, Andrew P Holmes, JB Poline, PJ Grasby, SCR Williams, Richard SJ Frackowiak, and Robert
 Turner. Analysis of fmri time-series revisited. Neuroimage, 2(1):45–53, 1995.
Rong Ge, Jason D Lee, and Tengyu Ma. Matrix completion has no spurious local minimum. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Rainer Gemulla, Erik Nijkamp, Peter J Haas, and Yannis Sismanis. Large-scale matrix factorization with
  distributed stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference
  on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 69–77, 2011.
Matthew F Glasser, Stephen M Smith, Daniel S Marcus, Jesper LR Andersson, Edward J Auerbach, Timo-
 thy EJ Behrens, Timothy S Coalson, Michael P Harms, Mark Jenkinson, Steen Moeller, et al. The human
 connectome project’s neuroimaging approach. Nature neuroscience, 19(9):1175–1187, 2016.
Donald Goldfarb. A family of variable-metric methods derived by variational means. Mathematics of com-
 putation, 24(109):23–26, 1970.
Ludovica Griffanti, Gholamreza Salimi-Khorshidi, Christian F Beckmann, Edward J Auerbach, Gwenaëlle
  Douaud, Claire E Sexton, Enikő Zsoldos, Klaus P Ebmeier, Nicola Filippini, Clare E Mackay, et al.
  Ica-based artefact removal and accelerated fmri acquisition for improved resting state network imaging.
  Neuroimage, 95:232–247, 2014.
Nathan Halko, Per-Gunnar Martinsson, and Joel A Tropp. Finding structure with randomness: Probabilistic
  algorithms for constructing approximate matrix decompositions. SIAM review, 53(2):217–288, 2011.
Harry H Harman. Modern factor analysis. University of Chicago press, 1976.
A. Hyvärinen, J. Karhunen, and E. Oja. Independent Component Analysis. Adaptive and Cognitive Dynamic
  Systems: Signal Processing, Learning, Communications and Control. Wiley, 2004. ISBN 9780471464198.
  URL https://books.google.com/books?id=96D0ypDwAkkC.
Robert I Jennrich and PF Sampson. Rotation for simple loadings. Psychometrika, 31(3):313–323, 1966.
Wichern A Johnson and Dean W. Wichern. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis. Prentice Hall, Upper
 Saddle River, 2002.


                                                     37
I.T. Jolliffe. Principal Component Analysis. Springer, 1986.
Henry F Kaiser. The varimax criterion for analytic rotation in factor analysis. Psychometrika, 23(3):187–200,
  1958.
Piotr Kokoszka and Matthew Reimherr. Introduction to functional data analysis. CRC press, 2017.
Nicole A Lazar. The statistical analysis of functional MRI data, volume 7. Springer, 2008.
Bing Li and Eftychia Solea. A nonparametric graphical model for functional data with application to brain
  networks based on fmri. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(524):1637–1655, 2018.
Martin A Lindquist. The statistical analysis of fmri data. Statistical science, 23(4):439–464, 2008.
Martin J McKeown, Scott Makeig, Greg G Brown, Tzyy-Ping Jung, Sandra S Kindermann, Anthony J Bell,
 and Terrence J Sejnowski. Analysis of fmri data by blind separation into independent spatial components.
 Human brain mapping, 6(3):160–188, 1998.
Jack O Neuhaus and Charles Wrigley. The quartimax method: An analytic approach to orthogonal simple
  structure 1. British Journal of Statistical Psychology, 7(2):81–91, 1954.
J. O. Ramsay and B. W. Silverman. Functional Data Analysis. Springer, 2005. ISBN 9780387400808. URL
   http://www.worldcat.org/isbn/9780387400808.
Philip T Reiss, Lan Huo, Yihong Zhao, Clare Kelly, and R Todd Ogden. Wavelet-domain regression and
  predictive inference in psychiatric neuroimaging. The annals of applied statistics, 9(2):1076, 2015.
Philip T Reiss, Jeff Goldsmith, Han Lin Shang, and R Todd Ogden. Methods for scalar-on-function regres-
  sion. International Statistical Review, 85(2):228–249, 2017.
Gholamreza Salimi-Khorshidi, Gwenaëlle Douaud, Christian F Beckmann, Matthew F Glasser, Ludovica
 Griffanti, and Stephen M Smith. Automatic denoising of functional mri data: combining independent
 component analysis and hierarchical fusion of classifiers. Neuroimage, 90:449–468, 2014.
David F Shanno. Conditioning of quasi-newton methods for function minimization. Mathematics of compu-
  tation, 24(111):647–656, 1970.
Stephen M Smith, Peter T Fox, Karla L Miller, David C Glahn, P Mickle Fox, Clare E Mackay, Nicola
  Filippini, Kate E Watkins, Roberto Toro, Angela R Laird, et al. Correspondence of the brain’s functional
  architecture during activation and rest. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 106(31):13040–
  13045, 2009.
Lukas Snoek, Maite M van der Miesen, Tinka Beemsterboer, Andries van der Leij, Annemarie Eigenhuis,
  and H Steven Scholte. The amsterdam open mri collection, a set of multimodal mri datasets for individual
  difference analyses. Scientific Data, 8(1):1–23, 2021.
Kyle Stanley, Nicole Lazar, and Matthew Reimherr. Functional factor modeling of brain connectivity. The
 Annals of Applied Statistics, 19(2):1553–1577, 2025.
Kyle Stanley, Nicole Lazar, and Matthew Reimherr. Distributed stochastic gradient descent for large-scale
 low-rank covariance matrix completion. In preparation, 2025+.
Michael E Tipping and Christopher M Bishop. Probabilistic principal component analysis. Journal of the
 Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 61(3):611–622, 1999.
Roberto Viviani, Georg Grön, and Manfred Spitzer. Functional principal component analysis of fmri data.
  Human brain mapping, 24(2):109–129, 2005.
Jane-Ling Wang, Jeng-Min Chiou, and Hans-Georg Müller. Functional data analysis. Annual Review of
  Statistics and Its Application, 3(1):257–295, 2016. doi: 10.1146/annurev-statistics-041715-033624. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-041715-033624.


                                                     38
