                                              SST-DUNet: Automated preclinical functional MRI
                                               skull stripping using Smart Swin Transformer and
                                                                   Dense UNet
                                             Sima Soltanpoura , Rachel Utamab , Arnold Changb , Md Taufiq Nasseefc ,
arXiv:2504.19937v1 [eess.IV] 27 Feb 2025




                                                Dan Madularud,e , Praveen Kulkarnib , Craig Ferrisb , Chris Joslina
                                                  a
                                                   School of Information Technology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By
                                                                      Dr, Ottawa, K1S 5B6, ON, Canada
                                               b
                                                 Center for Translational NeuroImaging (CTNI), Northeastern University, 360
                                                                  Huntington Ave, Boston, 02115, MA, USA
                                           c
                                             Department of Mathematics, College of Science and Humanity Studies, Prince Sattam
                                                          Bin Abdulaziz University, Al Kharj, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
                                           d
                                             Department of Psychology, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, K1S
                                                                             5B6, Ontario, Canada
                                                   e
                                                     Tessellis Ltd., 350 Legget Drive, Ottawa, K2K 0G7, Ontario, Canada




                                           Abstract
                                           Skull stripping is a common preprocessing step that is often performed man-
                                           ually in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) pipelines, including functional
                                           MRI (fMRI). This manual process is time-consuming and operator depen-
                                           dent. Automating this process is challenging for preclinical data due to
                                           variations in brain geometry, resolution, and tissue contrast. While existing
                                           methods for MRI skull stripping exist, they often struggle with the low reso-
                                           lution and varying slice sizes in preclinical fMRI data. This study proposes a
                                           novel method called SST-DUNet, that integrates a dense UNet-based archi-
                                           tecture with a feature extractor based on Smart Swin Transformer (SST) for
                                           fMRI skull stripping. The Smart Shifted Window Multi-Head Self-Attention
                                           (SSW-MSA) module in SST is adapted to replace the mask-based module in
                                           the Swin Transformer (ST), enabling the learning of distinct channel-wise fea-
                                           tures while focusing on relevant dependencies within brain structures. This
                                           modification allows the model to better handle the complexities of fMRI
                                           skull stripping, such as low resolution and variable slice sizes. To address the
                                           issue of class imbalance in preclinical data, a combined loss function using
                                           Focal and Dice loss is utilized. The model was trained on rat fMRI images
                                           and evaluated across three in-house datasets with a Dice similarity score

                                           Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                        April 29, 2025
of 98.65%, 97.86%, and 98.04%. The fMRI results obtained through auto-
matic skull stripping using the SST-DUNet model closely align with those
from manual skull stripping for both seed-based and independent compo-
nent analyses. These results indicate that the SST-DUNet can effectively
substitute manual brain extraction in rat fMRI analysis.
Keywords: skull stripping, swin transformer, dense UNet, preclinical,
functional MRI


1. Introduction
    Preclinical fMRI analysis plays a key role in understanding brain func-
tion and neurological disorders in animal models, with the goal of improving
human clinical research [1]. By studying functional connectivity, brain ac-
tivity patterns, and neural dynamics, preclinical fMRI enables researchers to
investigate the effects of diseases, drugs, and interventions in a controlled en-
vironment [2]. However, the accuracy and reliability of fMRI analysis depend
heavily on the preprocessing pipeline, which is essential for preparing data
for preclinical analysis. 3D Skull stripping is one of the crucial preprocess-
ing steps, by extracting the brain image from a 3D MRI image of the head.
The output of this process is a 3D binary mask that is used to distinguish
a contiguous brain from the rest of the head. Manually extracting the brain
is considered a common method for skull stripping, involving experts who
manually outline the brain image from the rest of the head [3]. Although a
manual approach can produce robust results, it is subjective, labor-intensive,
and time-consuming [4]. To address this issue, semi or fully automated meth-
ods have been developed for skull stripping. Developing such algorithms not
only enhances data quality but also improves the reproducibility and consis-
tency of findings, driving advancements in neuroscience research.
    In clinical MRI research related to the human brain, different automatic
skull stripping algorithms have been proposed and widely applied [5, 6, 7, 8,
9]. These methods are divided into two categories conventional and learning-
based methods [10]. However, these methods are not applicable to preclinical
applications due to differences in brain and scalp geometry, image resolution,
and image contrast.
    For preclinical skull stripping, the most prominent conventional algo-
rithms include Rapid Automatic Tissue Segmentation (RATS) proposed by
Oguz et al. [11], a template-derived approach proposed by Lohmeier et al.


                                       2
[12], SHape descriptor selected Extremal Regions after Morphologically filter-
ing (SHERM) proposed by Liu et al. [13], and antsBrainExtraction (antsBE)
proposed by MacNicol et al. [14]. A common constraint observed in the
above mentioned skull stripping methods is their performance variability
based on factors such as brain size, shape, texture, and contrast. Recently,
an atlas-based Veterinary Images Brain Extraction (VIBE) algorithm to ex-
tract brains on multi-contrast animal MRI has been proposed by Eddin et
al. [15]. However, this method has been tested on cat and dog brain MRI
data and has not been evaluated on other animal brain datasets like rats and
mice.
    Progress in the field of machine learning has introduced potential auto-
mated approaches for preclinical skull stripping. Roy et al. [16] proposed
a Convolutional Neural Netwrk (CNN) architecture with modified Google
Inception [17] using multiple atlases for 2D rodent brain MRI images. With
the advancement of deep learning, more advanced architectures of CNN have
been introduced for semantic segmentation. Among them, UNet, a widely
used deep CNN model, has demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in this
task. 2D UNet is utilized by Thai et al. [18] for mouse skull stripping
on diffusion weighted images. Hsu et al. [3] proposed a convolutional deep
learning-based method for skull stripping of rat and mouse brains using UNet
for 2D MRI data. The MRI image patches were randomly cropped to create
the brain mask, which served as input for the 2D UNet architecture. The
model’s performance was assessed by comparing a manually traced brain
mask by an anatomical expert with the one generated by the model. Deo
Feo et al. [19] introduced a multitask UNet (MUNet) designed for skull
stripping and region segmentation. The training and validation of the model
utilized anatomical MRI images from mice. Recently, Liang et al. [20] pro-
posed a skull stripping algorithm using U2 -Net for rat brain MRI. RUNet
is applied by Chang et al. [21] for skull stripping of rat MRI after ischemic
stroke. Also, Porter et al. [22] applied 2D UNet for skull stripping of MRI
rodent brains. While these methods have shown notable success, a common
limitation is their reliance on 2D MRI data, which inherently lacks spatial
relationships present in 3D imaging. This restriction could affect their ac-
curacy and generalizability when applied to fMRI datasets, where spatial
context is critical.
    Hsu et al. [23] proposed a method based on the 3D UNet framework
which uses 3D convolutional kernels to predict segmentations on volumetric
patches. The method has been trained and evaluated for brain extraction

                                      3
of 3D volumetric rat brain MRI data. Seo et al. [24] proposed a method
based on inverse spatial normalization and deep convolutional neural net-
work models for brain extraction of positron emission tomography (PET)
in mice. These methods have demonstrated success on structural MRI and
PET data but remain challenging for functional MRI (fMRI). They fail to ad-
dress challenges specific to fMRI, including low-resolution data, small brain
regions, and the varying slice sizes in front brain slices. The 3D UNet is
also applied by Ruan et al. [25] for skull stripping in mouse anatomical and
functional MRI analysis. However, its performance is limited when dealing
with the small brain regions present in the rostral and caudal slices, often
resulting in incomplete or inaccurate brain extraction. This challenge arises
due to the inability of the 3D UNet to adequately capture the fine-grained
spatial details in these regions, which are crucial for precise skull stripping
in preclinical fMRI data.
    Transformers have recently been used in medical imaging to enhance fea-
ture extraction, improving segmentation accuracy [26], [27], [28]. Lin et al.
[29] applied a 3D UNet framework with Swin transformers [30] for rodent
anatomical MRI skull stripping. Their model is based on Swin-UNETR [31]
to apply in MRI preclinical pipeline. However, this approach needs refine-
ment for preclinical fMRI, which often suffers from noise and low resolution.
Accurate extraction of both global and local features is crucial for this ap-
plication.
    In this paper, we propose a model based on Smart Swin Transformer
(SST) developed for 2D medical images by Fu et al. [32] to address the limi-
tations of the standard Swin Transformer for preclinical fMRI skull stripping.
While the mask in the conventional Swin Transformer primarily retains de-
pendencies between closely located pixels, the mask in our approach incorpo-
rates valuable distant interactions by considering the functional significance
of each slice. This enhancement ensures that our method captures both local
and global spatial relationships, which are critical for accurate brain extrac-
tion in preclinical fMRI data. We propose a modified SST to streamline
the preprocessing pipeline and improve efficiency in preclinical fMRI studies.
Our method is designed to be lightweight, fast, and computationally efficient,
ensuring adaptability and robustness across different fMRI studies. By intro-
ducing structural improvements, our model reduces resource requirements,
making it suitable for deployment in resource-constrained environments. The
SST is used as the encoder to a 3D dense UNet structure to apply densely
connected layers reusing features and improving gradient flow, which makes

                                      4
it highly effective in capturing image details. This architecture propagates
information from earlier layers to deeper layers and captures detailed features
from the input data. Preclinical datasets often exhibit imbalances in slice
sizes across different regions of the brain (front, middle, and back), posing a
challenge to skull stripping algorithms. To address this issue, we employed a
combined loss function integrating Dice loss [33] and Focal loss [34] functions
to guide the optimization of parameters without increasing computational
cost. This approach prevents the model from solely focusing on pixel accu-
racy across the entire image, ensuring that boundary pixels and other criti-
cal areas are also accurately predicted. It helps to handle the challenges of
segmenting irregularly distributed and class-imbalanced related to different
slice sizes. Consequently, the SST-based 3D dense UNet model provides a
robust and accurate skull stripping method in preclinical fMRI analysis and
improves the network’s ability to accurately distinguish between brain and
non-brain tissues. Comparative evaluations demonstrate its state-of-the-art
performance and practicality for preclinical applications. The contributions
of this work can be summarized as follows.

   • We develop a novel skull stripping approach for preclinical fMRI using
     a dense 3D UNet combined with a SST-based feature extractor.

   • We use a combination of Dice and Focal loss functions to improve ac-
     curacy and robustness in noisy, low-resolution fMRI data with different
     slice sizes.

   • We show that the proposed method outperforms existing techniques
     in skull stripping quality, Dice similarity score, and fMRI downstream
     tasks.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 proposes the skull
stripping algorithm using SST and dense UNet. Section 3 provides datasets
details information. Section 4 covers the experiments and evaluation results.
Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

2. Proposed Method
2.1. Smart Swin Transformer
    We apply Smart Swin Transformer (SST) [32] which is originally pro-
posed for 2D medical image segmentation. The SST is employed in our

                                      5
Figure 1: On the left side of the figure, the Smart Swin Transformer, composed of a
W-MSA and an SSM-MSA, is shown. The right side illustrates the detailed computation
process of the SSW-MSA, with the varying colors in the Smart Mask representing the
distinct masks used across different channels.


proposed method to extract features for preclinical fMRI skull stripping as
shown in Figure 1. The Swin Transformer [30] consists of two consecutive
modules: Multi Self-Attention (W-MSA) and Shifted Window Self-Attention
(SW-MSA). In the context of 3D MRI data, these modules are extended to
capture both spatial and volumetric features across different brain regions.
The W-MSA, which primarily focuses on local information, is used to model
voxel-wise interactions within a 3D window, ensuring that fine anatomical
structures are preserved. The SW-MSA, which captures global interactions,
is adapted to process cross-window dependencies across 3D feature volumes.
However, in standard SW-MSA, the masks of the self-attention matrix re-
main fixed across all channels, limiting the ability to leverage the diverse
feature representations required for accurate skull stripping. To address this,
the Smart Mask-based SST dynamically determines the mask of each channel
based on its specific characteristics. This enables adaptive learning of voxel-
wise and regional interactions, effectively distinguishing brain tissues from
non-brain structures. By leveraging channel-adaptive attention, the model
can enhance feature extraction across different MRI contrasts, improving
brain extraction accuracy while preserving anatomical details.
    The primary function of the SSW-MSA (Smart Shifted Window Multi-
Head Self-Attention) is illustrated for one slice in Figure 2. The movement
of the blue box represents the shifted window. The orange box denotes the


                                        6
Figure 2: The shifted window and Smart Mask within the SSW-MSA (Smart Shifted
Window Multi-Head Self-Attention) mechanism of the Smart Swin Transformer (SST),
specifically for one slice and one channel.


region used for computing the self-attention score, which is constrained by
the Smart Mask within a specific channel. Each channel has distinct masks,
and only one mask is displayed here (specifically, the channel responsible for
capturing interactions among foreground pixels).
    The self-attention module is defined by the following equation:


                                                 QK T
                                                              
        Self Attention(Q, K, V ) = Softmax        √ + SmartMask V            (1)
                                                   d
    where Q, K, and V are the Query, Key, and Value matrices, respectively,
                                3
with dimensions Q, K, V ∈ RM ×d . M 3 is the number of patches in the input
                                                                            3   3
volume. d is the dimension of the key/query vectors. SmartM ask ∈ RM ×M
is the channel-specific mask that is learned to adjust the self-attention weights
for each channel.
    The smart mask takes advantage of channel-wise features by creating
different masks in various channels. The SSW-MSA improves long range
dependencies by keeping precise context data and ignoring pointless interac-
tions. The details of the SSM-MSA are shown on the right side of Figure 1.
W-MSA and SSW-MSA provide the local and global information focusing on
features at channel level which is different from the Swin transformer. The

                                       7
           Figure 3: A Framework of the proposed model, SST-DUNet.


formula to represent the Swin transformer block, the structure on the left
side of the Figure 1 is as follows:

                        Z l = WMSA (LN(Ẑ l−1 )) + Ẑ l−1
                        Z l = MLP(LN(Ẑ l )) + Ẑ l
                                                                         (2)
                      Ẑ l+1 = SSWMSA (LN(Ẑ l )) + Ẑ l
                      Z l+1 = MLP(LN(Ẑ l+1 )) + Ẑ l+1
    where Z i is the output of layer i. LN (LayerNorm) represents a regu-
larization. M LP denotes multi-layer preceptron. WM SA and SSWM SA rep-
resent the window self-attentive mechanism and the smart shifted window
self-attentive respectively.

2.2. Network Architecture
    We apply dense UNet architecture with SST for our proposed SST-DUNet
preclinical fMRI skull stripping. Dense UNet was initially developed by
Kolavrik et al.[35] for the human brain and spine segmentation. In the dense


                                       8
UNet architecture, dense connections are introduced between layers, meaning
each layer receives input not only from its preceding layer but also from all
previous layers. This dense connectivity allows the model to reuse features
from different scales and levels of abstraction, which can be particularly ben-
eficial for handling preclinical data. Preclinical MRI images may lack fine
details, and traditional UNet architectures may struggle to capture and pre-
serve important features for accurate skull stripping. The dense connections
in dense UNet facilitate the flow of information throughout the network,
enabling better feature reuse and enhancing the model’s ability to extract
relevant details. Dense UNet architectures are known for their ability to
handle both local and global contexts leading to more accurate and robust
segmentation results.
    The SST-DUNet architecture is shown in Figure 3. The dense UNet
architecture is composed by integrating extra interconnections into the core
structure of the 3D UNet architecture. Dense and residual interconnections
are shown in Figure 3 in blue and green color, respectively. As the figure
shows an image of 128 × 128 × 64 is input to the SST and encoder part of the
dense UNet. The first layer increases the number of channels to 48. There is a
patch embedding, three SST blocks, and three patch merging to downsample
the features by a factor of two each time. These four layers of the SST output
features with channel numbers of 48-96-192-384 respectively. The features
of these four scales are input into the decoder part of the network. This
architecture is characterized by an auto-encoder design featuring five down-
sampling and five up-sampling blocks linked by a bridge block at the bottom
of the network. Each down-sampling block reduces the feature size by half
through a max-pooling layer. At the start of each up-sampling block, the
feature size is doubled through a transposed convolution layer employing a
stride of 2 for each dimension. Similarly, the decoder module utilizes the same
number of layers in reverse order. Each convolutional layer of the encoder
and decoder, except the last one, is followed by a Leaky rectified linear unit
(LeakyReLU) activation function. A Sigmoid activation function is applied
in the last layer. The Sigmoid function is used to produce output values
that represent probabilities, enabling the network to generate binary skull
stripping masks.

2.3. Combo Loss Function
    A key step to train deep networks on imbalanced data is to apply a proper
loss function. Unlike the common approach of combining Cross-Entropy

                                      9
(CE) loss [36] and Dice loss [33] functions, which primarily target the overall
segmentation accuracy of the entire image, the integration of Focal loss [34]
and Dice loss functions prioritizes challenging-to-classify pixels, such as those
at boundaries or across varying scales. This strategy enables the SST to
effectively identify and utilize high-quality long-range dependencies across
different channels, thereby enhancing the model’s segmentation accuracy.
The combo loss (LCombo ) is calculated as a weighted sum of Dice loss (LDice )
and Focal loss (LF ) defined by the following formula.

                        LCombo = αLF + (1 − α)LDice                          (3)
   where α ∈ [0, 1] is used to control the relative contribution of the Dice
and Focal terms to the loss.
   Dice loss is a widely adopted metric to assess the dissimilarity between
predicted (X)and ground truth (Y ) segmentation regions:

                                            2 |X ∩ Y |
                            LDice = 1 −                                      (4)
                                            |X| + |Y |
   Dice loss is minimized when the model maximizes the overlap between
predicted and true segmentation regions. However, there are limitations
because of the linear nature of Dice loss. To address these drawbacks, we
apply the Focal loss function which is obtained by adding an exponential
weight term to the Cross-Entropy (CE) loss (LCE ). The CE and Focal loss
functions are calculated as follow:


                           LCE = − log(pt )
                                                                             (5)
                            LF = −(1 − pt )γ log(pt )

    where, pt refers to the classification property of the current pixel. γ is a
hyper-parameter designed to regulate the intensity of penalizing incorrectly
classified pixels, typically set to 2. As evident from the equation, Focal loss
imposes a stronger penalty on pixels that are more likely to be misclassified.
This approach helps address the imbalance between positive and negative
samples, as well as the class imbalance.

2.4. Implementation Details
    The model was trained using the Keras framework using TensorFlow
backend on the Nvidia GeForce RTX 4090 graphics card using CUDA. The

                                       10
model was trained with a combo loss, and AdamW optimizer with param-
eters learning rate= 0.00001, α = 0.4, and decay = 0.0001, and batch size
of 2. The learning rate scheduler uses Linear Warmup Cosine Annealing,
starting with a 50-epoch warmup phase where the learning rate slowly rises
from a low value to the target rate. After warmup, the learning rate follows
a cosine annealing pattern, gradually decreasing to improve convergence.

3. Datasets
    In this paper, we applied three in-house datasets related to seven studies
containing 280 rats collected by the Center for Translational NeuroImag-
ing (CTNI) of Northeastern University. Experiments were conducted us-
ing a Bruker Biospec 7.0T/20-cm USR horizontal magnet (Bruker, Billerica,
Massachusetts) and a 20-G/cm magnetic field gradient insert (ID = 12 cm)
capable of a 120-µs rise time (Bruker). Radiofrequency signals were sent
and received with the quad-coil electronics built into the animal restrainer.
Male Sprague Dawley rats weighting 325-350 g were obtained from Charles
River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA, USA), and maintained on a 12:12 hour
light-dark cycle with a light on at 0700 hours and allowed access to food and
water ad libitum. All rats were acquired and cared for in accordance with the
guidelines published in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Ani-
mals (National Institutes of Health Publications No. 85–23, Revised 1985)
and adhered to the National Institutes of Health and the American Associ-
ation for Laboratory Animal Science guidelines. The protocols used in this
study were compliant with the regulations of the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee at the Northeastern University.
    At the beginning of each imaging session, a high-resolution anatomical
data set was collected using the rapid acquisition with relaxation enhance-
ment (RARE) pulse sequence (25 slices; 1 mm; field of view (FOV) 3.0
cm ; image size 256 × 256; Time of Repetition (TR) 2.5 sec; Time of Echo
(TE) 12.4 msec; Number of Excitations (NEX) 6; 6-minute acquisition time).
Functional images for the task-based fMRI portion were acquired using a
Half-Fourier acquisition, single-shot, turbo-spin echo sequence (RARE-st). A
single scanning session was acquired 96×96 in-plane resolution, 20-25 slices
every 6 seconds (TR = 6000 msec; TE 48 msec; RARE factor 36; NEX 1)
repeated 100 times for every 10-minute scan. Resting state functional MRI
(rsfMRI) data were collected before and after task-based fMRI scanning us-
ing a spin-echo triple-shot EPI sequence (imaging parameters: image size 96

                                     11
× 96 × slice numbers [length × width × depth], the number of slices varies
between 20 and 25, depending on brain size, TR 1000 ms, TE 15 ms, voxel
size 0.312 × 0.312 mm, slice thickness 1.2 mm, 300 repetitions, acquisition
time 15 min).
3.1. Data Pre-processing
    Data preprocessing is critical for enhancing the model’s robustness and
generalization. All the images are resized to 128 × 128 × 64. Addition-
ally, data augmentation methods such as Gaussian noise, Gaussian blur,
brightness and contrast adjustments, simulated low resolution, and gamma
correction were incorporated to enhance dataset diversity and improve the
model’s ability to handle real-world image variations. The input voxel values
were adjusted to fall within the range of 0.0 to 1.0 through normalization.
3.2. Data for Training and Test
    In this paper, we applied the mean of fMRI data to create a 3D MRI
dataset. We applied 5 studies (dataset 1) containing 260 samples for train-
ing and test. To train the model, we initially created a training dataset by
randomly selecting 80% of the data, reserving the remaining 20% for final
performance testing. During the training phase, an additional 80% of the
data were randomly sampled from the training dataset, leaving the remain-
ing 20% for validating the training of the model. This training-validation
process was repeated five times to ensure an unbiased data distribution.
Subsequently, the model with the highest averaged validation accuracy was
chosen as the final model for testing. To evaluate the model’s generalization
ability, we applied two studies, each of them containing 10 samples (dataset
2, and dataset 3). These studies have not been applied for training.
3.3. Data Post-processing
    After generating the predicted mask, post-processing involves retaining
the largest connected component while discarding smaller, disconnected re-
gions. This ensures a coherent and structurally meaningful skull-stripped
output for fMRI data. By eliminating noise and irrelevant fragments, the
method enhances segmentation accuracy and preserves anatomical integrity.
This approach is particularly beneficial for fMRI preprocessing, where accu-
rate skull removal is essential for downstream analysis. This simple effective
strategy refines the network’s output, improving reliability for real-world
applications. Ultimately, it ensures that the final mask aligns with the struc-
tural requirements of fMRI data processing.

                                      12
4. Experimental results
    To validate the effectiveness of our proposed approach, we compared it
with RATS [11], a commonly used traditional method, and deep learning-
based methods including 3D UNet [23], UNet-CNN [22], SWIN-UNETR[31],
SSTrans-Net [32], and RS2-Net [29]. RATS is a traditional intensity-based
method that relies on region-growing and thresholding techniques. 3D UNet
has been studied in preclinical fMRI skull stripping research by Ruan et
al. [25] which employs an encoder-decoder structure with skip connections.
UNet-CNN applies a modified UNet-based framework for feature extraction.
Swin-UNETR introduces a transformer-based approach with a sliding win-
dow mechanism for enhanced feature extraction. SSTrans-Net is a 2D med-
ical segmentation method based on a u-shaped Smart Swin Transformer.
RS2-Net is based on Swin-UNETR for preclinical MRI skull stripping. The
parameters for each method were selected based on the optimal parameters
recommended by each respective paper.
    To quantitatively assess the skull stripping performance of models, we
measured the similarity between the resulting brain and manually drawn
brain masks, which served as the ground truth. Brain masks were manually
computed for each sample with ITK-SNAP (v3.8.0). To improve contrast,
mean files of the functional images were used to delineate between the brain
and non-brain tissue.

4.1. MRI Image Analysis
    In this section, we present the MRI image analysis methods used for skull
stripping, focusing on the evaluation of the proposed approach using various
quantitative metrics.

4.1.1. Evaluation Metrics
    We applied the following evaluation metrics to assess the proposed model’s
performance quantitatively. Dice is used to compute the similarity score of
two samples. Positive Prediction Value (PPV) is applied to calculate the
proportion of true positives within the predictions made. An evaluation of
surface distance using the Hausdorff Distance (HD), which measures the dis-
tance between two sample sets. And Sensitivity (SEN) calculates the rate
of true positives in manual skull stripping. We consider X to represent the
voxel set of the manually skull-stripped volume, and Y to represent the voxel
set of the predicted volume. These metrics are calculated as follows:


                                     13
Table 1: Metrics values are reported as mean ± standard deviation on CTNI
fMRI dataset 1. Statistical analysis is conducted to compare the performance
of the proposed SST-DUNet and those of other competing methods ∗ P < 0.05,
∗∗
   P < 0.01.
       Method                Dice               PPV               HD                   SEN
                                      ∗∗                 ∗∗              ∗∗
        RATS           0.9032±0.0317       0.8956±0.0345      5.245±2.512         0.9254±0.0045∗∗
      3D UNet          0.9648±0.0221∗      0.9673±0.0186∗∗    2.619±0.438∗        0.9362±0.0175∗∗
     UNet-CNN          0.9749±0.0210∗∗     0.9781±0.0134∗∗    2.178±0.424∗∗       0.9465±0.0115∗∗
    Swin-UNETR         0.9785±0.0128∗∗     0.9804±0.0117      2.109±0.271∗∗       0.9764±0.0098∗
     SSTrans-Net       0.9793±0.0116∗∗     0.9815±0.0123      1.958±0.339∗∗       0.9752±0.0114∗
       RS2 -Net        0.9809±0.0119∗      0.9823±0.0108∗     1.887±0.243∗        0.9849±0.0091
 SST-DUNet (ours)      0.9865±0.0112       0.9855±0.0098      1.597±0.217         0.9861±0.0086



                            2 |X ∩ Y |
                       Dice =                                               (6)
                            |X| + |Y |
                            |X ∩ Y |
                      PPV =                                                 (7)
                               |Y |
                       HD = max{h(X, Y ), h(Y, X)}                          (8)
                            |X ∩ Y |
                      SEN =                                                 (9)
                               |X|

    where h(X, Y ) = max {min d(x, y) | x ∈ X, y ∈ Y } and d(x, y) is the Eu-
clidean distance between x and y.

4.1.2. Results
    Table 1 shows the mean values and standard deviations of all metrics for
the CTNI fMRI dataset 1 test set. The table illustrates that our method
achieved the highest values in Dice, PPV, and SEN metrics and the lowest
value in HD metrics compared with other methods. Although all the learning-
based methods achieved ideal results with Dice > 0.95, the proposed method,
SST-DUNet, illustrated higher accuracy (Dice = 0.9865±0.0112) versus those
other methods. The low PPV and high SEN from the RATS method shows an
overestimation of brain extraction. The lower value for HD (1.597 ± 0.217)


                                     14
further supports the superior ability of our method to match the ground
truth.

Table 2: Metrics values are reported as mean ± standard deviation on CTNI fMRI dataset
2, and dataset 3. Statistical analysis is conducted to compare the performance of the
proposed SST-DUNet and those of other competing methods ∗ P < 0.05, ∗∗ P < 0.01.



       Dataset2
        Method                  Dice                 PPV                  HD                  SEN
                                          ∗∗                   ∗∗                 ∗∗
         RATS             0.8613±0.0218        0.7522±0.4819        5.467±0.492          0.9402±0.0271∗∗
       3D UNet            0.9517±0.0233∗       0.9659±0.0179∗∗      2.724±0.385∗∗        0.9149±0.0138∗∗
     SSTrans-Net          0.9649±0.0161∗∗      0.9681±0.0127∗        1.962±0.411         0.9749±0.0127∗
        RS2 -Net          0.9714±0.0154∗       0.9729±0.0123∗        1.812±0.251         0.9755±0.0123
  SST-DUNet (ours)        0.9786±0.0142        0.9788±0.0199        1.721±0.220          0.9763±0.0114
       Dataset3
        Method                  Dice                 PPV                  HD                  SEN
         RATS             0.8995±0.0216∗∗      0.7529±0.4733∗∗      5.455±0.492∗∗        0.9418±0.0263∗∗
       3D UNet            0.9525±0.0217∗        0.9661±0.0188        2.709±0.384         0.9154±0.0125∗∗
     SSTrans-Net          0.9685±0.0155∗∗      0.9727±0.0129∗        1.958±0.405∗        0.9751±0.0116
        RS2 -Net          0.9735±0.0149∗∗       0.9741±0.0121       1.769±0.249∗∗        0.9764±0.0112
  SST-DUNet (ours)        0.9804±0.0131        0.9819±0.0109        1.633±0.215          0.9789±0.0109


    To demonstrate the generalizability of our method, a test was conducted
on two unseen datasets (dataset 2 and dataset 3). The trained model on
dataset 1 has been applied and evaluated using unseen data. Table 2 shows
the quantitative results of our method and its comparison with state-of-the-
art on the dataset 2 and dataset 3. We reported results related to RATS as a
conventional method, and three learning-based methods including 3D UNet
which was applied by Ruan et al. [25] for fMRI skull stripping and SSTrans-
Net, and RS2 -Net with highest dice value based on the results in Table 1.
The mean values and standard deviations of all metrics have been reported
in this table. As the results show our method outperformed other methods
and produced accurate skull stripping results with Dice = 0.9786 ± 0.0142

                                         15
Figure 4: This figure presents the skull-stripping results across various CTNI datasets
(A, B: dataset 1- C: dataset 2, D: dataset 3). The red region indicates the manually
annotated ground truth, while the areas outlined in different colors correspond to the
results produced by different methods.


and HD = 1.7211 ± 0.220 for dataset 2, and Dice = 0.9804 ± 0.0131 and
HD = 1.633 ± 0.215 for dataset 3. Results show that the proposed method
is capable of performing skull stripping on preclinical brain images across
different datasets without additional training.
    In addition to the four evaluation metrics discussed in the previous sec-
tion, we performed a significance analysis on the skull stripping results to
assess the differences between the outcomes produced by our method and
those from the other methods. The p-values presented in Table 1, and Table
2 offer important insights into the statistical significance of these differences.
A p-value below 0.05 is generally considered statistically significant, mean-
ing the observed differences are unlikely to be due to random chance. In
our case, the p-values for most comparisons between our method and other
methods, across all evaluation metrics, are below 0.01, and some of them are
below 0.05. This low p-value indicates a substantial and highly significant
performance gap, demonstrating that our method outperforms the others in
all these metrics. However, for some metrics in Table 1, such as PPV and


                                          16
Figure 5: This figure presents the skull stripping results for two fMRI samples from
dataset 1 in three differnt views (Axial, Sagittal, and Coronal). The light green region
indicates the manually annotated ground truth, while the areas outlined with different
colored lines correspond to the outcomes from different methods.


SEN, Swin-UNETR, SSTrans-Net, and RS2-Net show higher p-values. While
the metric values still suggest that our method performs better, the differ-
ences are not statistically significant. Additionally, in Table 2, the HD and
SEN metrics show higher p-values for SSTrans-Net and RS2-Net on dataset
2, and the SEN and PPV metrics show higher p-values for SSTrans-Net and
RS2-Net on dataset 3.
    To evaluate the performance of our proposed method, skull stripping
results from two subjects in the dataset 1 test set are presented in Figure 4A
and B, showing slices from both the middle and back regions of the brain.
Additionally, results from a single slice of one subject from dataset 2 and
dataset 3 are illustrated in Figure 4C and D. As shown in Figure 4, RATS
tends to misclassify non-brain tissues as brain, whereas all deep learning-
based methods effectively extract brain tissues. Further comparisons of deep
learning-based methods applied to two fMRI samples from dataset 1 are
visualized in Figure 5, offering three different views for a more comprehensive
assessment.
    The Dice metrics for each slice, reported in Table 3, provide a quantita-
tive comparison of the methods. These results highlight that our proposed

                                          17
method outperforms existing techniques and offers a reliable solution for pre-
clinical skull stripping.

Table 3: Dice metric values related to Figure 4 and Figure 5, samples A and B are from
dataset 1, sample C, and sample D belongs to dataset 2, and 3 respectively.

           Figure 4
           Method            Sample A     Sample B      Sample C     Sample D
            RATS              0.9012          0.8756      0.8667       0.8979
           3D UNet            0.9536          0.9427      0.9384       0.9415
         SSTrans-Net          0.9712          0.9678      0.9542       0.9654
              2
           RS -Net            0.9751          0.9697      0.9567       0.9686
     SST-DUNet(ours)          0.9819        0.9781       0.9687        0.9773
           Figure 5
           Method            Sample A                   Sample B
           3D UNet            0.9519                      0.9504
         SSTrans-Net          0.9642                      0.9617
              2
           RS -Net            0.9661                      0.9654
     SST-DUNet(ours)          0.9765                     0.9749


    Since fMRI data is inherently noisy, we conducted a test to simulate noise
by adding Rician noise. This test aims to assess the robustness of our skull
stripping method under varying noise conditions and ensure its effectiveness
in real-world scenarios. To further enhance the quality of fMRI data, ad-
vanced denoising techniques can be applied prior to skull stripping. In our
recent work on fMRI denoising [37], we demonstrated an effective approach
to reducing noise while preserving essential brain structures. Integrating such
methods could further improve skull stripping accuracy, especially in highly
noisy datasets. We evaluated the performance of our skull stripping algo-
rithm on images with different noise levels to validate its reliability. In this
test, we manually introduced Rician Noise [38], which is an artificially gen-
erated noise to the MRI data. Rician noise is commonly employed in MRI
research due to its ability to closely mimic the noise patterns observed in
MRI data [38]. As real preclinical data typically exhibits noise levels around

                                         18
  Figure 6: Proposed method’s performance under different noise levels on dataset 1.


3%, we followed the experimental set-up inspired by Ran et al. [38], applying
noise levels (noise standard deviation) ranging from 1% to 15% in increments
of 2%.
    The model performance has been illustrated in Figure 6 for different noise
levels on the dataset 1. Figure 6A shows skull stripping results for noise levels
1% to 9% for one sample from the dataset 1 test set for a middle slice. As
Figure 6B shows, our method’s performance decreases with increasing Rician
noise level. However, the skull stripping accuracy could still reach a suitable
Dice > 0.95 and HD < 3 for noise levels 1% to 7%. This illustrates the ability
of our method to tolerate noise, implying that this method could effectively
manage fMRI data across a broad spectrum of Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)
qualities.

4.2. Seed-based functional connectivity analysis
    To further compare the manual brain extraction and the proposed SST-
DUNet, we applied seed-based functional connectivity analysis [39], and [40].
Skull stripping is often a bottleneck in preprocessing for seed-based functional


                                         19
connectivity (FC) analysis due to the time-intensive process of generating
brain extraction masks for each subject. Functional connectivity analysis
identifies how regions of interest (ROIs) cluster together in the brain, reveal-
ing general patterns of connectivity across a group of subjects. To evaluate
whether the SST-DUNet algorithm can reliably replace manual skull strip-
ping in FC analysis, we compared the connectivity results from both man-
ual and SST-DUNet methods. The analysis was conducted across five study
groups of dataset 1, each comprising eight rat subjects, resulting in 171 × 171
matrices of t-stat values representing ROI-to-ROI connectivity. These t-stat
values were derived by first calculating Fisher Z-transformed correlation co-
efficients across the 8 subjects, followed by one-sided t-tests to obtain the
final t-statistics.
    A scatterplot for group 1 in Figure 7A of the t-stat results for manual
versus SST-DUNet skull stripping methods showed a strong linear relation-
ship, with a slope of 0.996, an intercept of -0.013, and a Pearson correlation
coefficient (R) of 0.994, demonstrating near-identical connectivity outcomes.
Also, the SST-DUNet outperforms 3D UNet and RS2 -Net as the results in
Figure 7A show. Furthermore, this comparison was repeated in four addi-
tional groups with consistent results (see Figure 7B). The correlation coef-
ficients for those were 0.991, 0.993, 0.986, and 0.989 respectively, providing
strong evidence that SST-DUNet provides a reliable and efficient alternative
to manual skull stripping for functional connectivity analysis.

4.3. Independent Component Analysis
    To further analyze the proposed method for fMRI skull stripping, we
applied Independent Component Analysis (ICA).

4.3.1. Method
    Hypothesis free ICA was executed by combining skull stripping method
groups of dataset 1 (Manual=8, SST-DUNet=8, 3D UNet=8, RS2 -Net=8)
applying the Group ICA of a well-recognized fMRI Toolbox (GIFT, v1.3i,
www.nitrc.org/projects/gift/) in MATLAB [41], [42], [43], [44], [45]. Ini-
tially, a 30-component ICA decomposition was performed to identify whole-
brain resting-state networks and individual brain regions [41]. Additionally,
the standard built-in approach within the GIFT toolbox was employed to
assess the stability and reliability of the extracted components [42].
    For computation and statistical analysis, an in-house MATLAB script
was utilized from our previous studies [42],[43]. Particularly, the toolbox-

                                      20
Figure 7: FC analysis (A) Analysis of SST-DUNet (this study), 3D UNet, and RS2 -Net
on group 1 dataset 1. (B) Analysis of SST-DUNet (this study) on Groups 2, 3, 4, and 5
datasets 1.


generated time series for each of the 30 components were extracted from
all 32 subjects (Manual=8, SST-DUNet=8, 3D UNet=8, RS2 -Net=8) for
functional connectivity (FC) analysis. Moreover, statistical testing included
applying two-tailed paired and one-sample t-tests independently with false
discovery rate (FDR) correction (Using fdr bh function in MATLAB), was
conducted to assess component-to-component connectivity.
    For each of the 30 components, the correlation coefficient (CC) was com-
puted across all 32 subjects. Consequently, the mean CC and standard de-
viation (Std) were then calculated for each different preprocessing groups
separately. Subsequently, within-group significance testing was performed
using a one-sample t-test (p < 0.05). Additionally, a pairwise two-tailed
t-test (p = 0.05) was conducted to compare between the Manual and three
automated skull stripping methods. Moreover, all p-values were corrected
for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) method [42],
[43].
    Furthermore, to visualize group-level outcomes, scatter, box, beeswamp
and histogram plots were produced using built-in MATLAB functions. Im-
portantly, these visualization techniques provide a clear representation of
potential correlations, data distribution, and group differences, improving

                                         21
the interpretability of our findings.

4.3.2. Results
    Spatial independent component analysis (ICA) was conducted on the pre-
processed resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data from all 32 rats across all the
Manual and three automated skull stripping methods.
    Figure 8 has been shown in four parts as follows: (A) 30-Components:
Representative 2D illustrations of 30 generated components derived from
group independent component analysis (ICA) from all 32 rats (Manual=8,
SST-DUNet=8, 3D UNet=8, RS2 -Net=8) fMRI data, highlighting distinct/multiple
brain regions or networks across the entire brain. These components are dis-
played using a red-to-yellow color scale, overlaid on coronal slices of the
standard rat brain template, providing a comprehensive visualization of spa-
tial patterns observed in the dataset. Warmer colors (yellow) indicate higher
intensity brain regions within each component; (B) Mean Correlation Coeffi-
cient (CC) Matrices: The four rows (top to bottom) represent the mean CC
square matrices for the Manual group and other three individual automated
skull stripping methods independently computed across all 30 independent
components. Positive and negative mean CC values are represented using red
and blue color bars, respectively; (C) Standard Deviation (Std) Matrices:
The corresponding standard deviation matrices for the Manual and other
three individual automated skull stripping methods are shown in the four
rows. The color scale (ranging from white to dark red) represents the vari-
ability in CC values across subjects within each group, providing insight into
intra-group consistency; (D) Statistical Significance Testing: The results of
the one-sample t-test (p < 0.05, FDR-corrected, n = 8) are displayed, where
statistically significant p values are indicated by green-shaded bars. (B-D)
The right-side color scales for each panel correspond to the magnitude of
mean CC values (left column), standard deviation values (middle column),
and statistically significant p-values (bottom column).
    Using the GIFT toolbox in MATLAB [41], [42], [43], [44], [45], we first
extracted 30 independent components (Figure 8A) and their time series from
each dataset. Subsequently, the quality, stability, and reliability of these
components were assessed using the standard built-in validation methods of
the GIFT toolbox [42], [43]. This hypothesis-free ICA approach enabled a
whole-brain investigation of potential differences between two Manual and
automated skull stripping methods.
    To evaluate intra-group connectivity patterns, we computed symmetric

                                        22
Figure 8: ICA 30-Component and Intra-Group Post-Analysis in Manual and other 3
automated skull stripping methods on Rats fMRI data preprocessing; (A) 30-Components
(B) Mean Correlation Coefficient (CC) Matrices (C) Standard Deviation (Std) Matrices
(D) Statistical Significance Testing (B-D) The right-side color scales for each panel cor-
respond to the magnitude of mean CC values (left column), standard deviation values
(middle column), and statistically significant p-values (bottom column).




                                           23
correlation coefficients (CC) among the 30 components for each rat individ-
ually. Subsequently, for each group, we derived the mean CC (Figure 8B),
standard deviation (Std) (Figure 8C), and one-sample t-test (p < 0.05, FDR-
corrected, n = 8) (Figure 8D) results. Interestingly, these analyses revealed
a high degree of similarity in functional connectivity patterns between the
Manual and automated skull stripping methods.
    To further evaluate group-level differences, we illustrate Inter-Group ICA
30-Component Post-Analysis in Manual and other three individual auto-
mated skull stripping Groups in Rats in Figure 9. This figure is presented
as follows: (A) Scatter Plot with Regression Line: The left, middle, and
right panels illustrate the comparison between the Manual and other three
individual automated skull stripping methods independently using scatter
plots with fitted regression lines in red color. These plots represent the dis-
tribution of 435 correlation coefficient (CC) values across the different skull
stripping methods; (B) Statistical Significance Testing: The left, middle,
and right panels present the results of a pairwise two-tailed t-test (p = 0.05,
FDR-corrected, n = 8 per group), evaluating statistical differences between
the Manual and other three individual automated skull stripping methods
distinctly across all 435 CC values; (C) Box Plot Representation: The box
plot illustrates the distribution of mean CC values across all 435 samples for
the Manual and three individual automated skull stripping methods. It high-
lights the variation, central tendencies, and spread of the data; (D) Beeswamp
Plot Representation: The beeswarm plot provides a detailed visualization of
the CC distributions for the Manual and three automated skull stripping
methods, capturing individual data points while showcasing variation across
all 435 CC values; (E) Histogram Plot Representation: The histogram de-
picts the frequency distribution of CC values across 10 bins for the Manual
and three automated skull stripping methods, offering a comparative view of
their statistical distributions.
    We visualized the data using scatter plots with regression lines (Figure
9A), box plots (Figure 9C), beeswamp plots (Figure 9D) and histogram plots
(Figure 9E). Interestingly, the box plot represents a highly similar mean,
quartile and outlier between the Manual and SST-DUNet methods. Addi-
tionally, a pairwise two-sample t-test (p = 0.05, two-tailed, FDR-corrected,
n = 8/8) was conducted to compare the Manual and 3 automated skull strip-
ping methods (Figure 9B). Remarkably, no statistically significant differences
were observed between the Manual and proposed SST-DUNet methods, high-
lighting a striking similarity in their connectivity signatures. Hence, these

                                      24
Figure 9: Inter-Group ICA 30-Component Post-Analysis in Manual and other three
individual automated skull stripping Groups in Rats; (A) Scatter Plot with Regression
Line (B) Statistical Significance Testing (C) Box Plot Representation(D) Beeswamp Plot
Representation (E) Histogram Plot Representation.




                                         25
findings indicate that the proposed method reliably reproduces results ob-
tained through manual processing, underscoring its robustness and potential
for automated rs-fMRI analysis.

4.4. Computational cost
    To assess the model’s performance in terms of computational cost, we
compared it with different methods. All the experiments have been per-
formed using an RTX 4090 GPU; the results are shown in Table 4. As the
table shows the average inference time reduces from 0.62 s for RS2 -Net to
0.55 s for our method. This advantage is important for running models on
devices with limited GPU power, making the method more practical for var-
ious applications. It also confirms the strong performance of our method in
deep learning-based preclinical skull stripping.

Table 4: Performance comparison. The inference time is measured as the average runtime
across all successfully obtained results in the test examples.

           Methods          Input size      Parameters (M)      Inference time (s)
             RATS          Original size            -                  179.22
           3D UNet         128x128x64              1.9                  0.22
        Swin-UNETR         128x128x64             62.2                  0.75
         SSTrans-Net       128x128x64             29.6                  0.68
           RS2 -Net        128x128x64             14.9                  0.62
             Ours          128x128x64             12.5                  0.55



4.5. Discussion
    To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first attempt
to perform rat brain fMRI skull stripping using a framework built on the
Smart Swin Transformer. It attains state-of-the-art performance, achieving
a Dice coefficient 0.98, comparable to manually segmented brains. Given
its outstanding accuracy in skull stripping tasks and reduced computational
demands, our framework shows significant potential as an alternative to man-
ual labelling in the rat functional magnetic resonance imaging preprocessing


                                           26
pipeline. We compared deep learning-based methods with a well-known tra-
ditional approach, RATS, and found that they consistently outperform it.
Among the deep learning-based methods, our proposed approach achieved
the highest performance, leveraging the strengths of the Smart Swin Trans-
former (SST) and dense interconnections. This combination enhances feature
extraction and information flow, leading to more accurate and consistent skull
stripping results across various datasets.
    The results of the seed-based functional connectivity analysis demonstrate
that SST-DUNet is a reliable and efficient alternative to manual skull strip-
ping for rat brain fMRI preprocessing. The strong linear correlation between
manual and SST-DUNet results, with Pearson coefficients consistently above
0.98 across all groups, confirms that the proposed method preserves essential
connectivity patterns.
    Independent Component Analysis (ICA) offers a powerful, unbiased and
hypothesis-free approach for whole-brain analysis, enabling the identification
of functionally independent brain regions/networks and facilitating a deeper
understanding of brain function and connectivity [41], [42], [43], [44], [45].
More importantly, by decomposing complex neuroimaging data into spatially
distinct components, ICA provides valuable insights into intrinsic brain orga-
nization, making it a widely used technique in functional connectivity as well
as other studies. In this paper, we utilize the advantage of ICA to explore
the effectiveness of our newly proposed AI automated skull stripping method
in the brain fMRI preprocessing pipeline. Although the scatter plots with re-
gression lines (Figure 9A), box plot (Figure 9C) and two-tailed paired t-test
(Figure 9B) indicate high similarity between the Manual and SST-DUNet
methods compared to 3D UNet and RS2 -Net methods, subtle differences
emerge when analyzing the mean CC using one-sample t-test (p < 0.05, FDR-
corrected, n = 8) (Figure 8D), beeswarm (Figure 9D) and histogram (Figure
9E) plots. Notably, these alternative visualizations reveal trivial discrepan-
cies in the mean CC distributions, suggesting minor variations in how each
method processes skull stripping. Moreover, the beeswarm plot highlights in-
dividual data point dispersion, while the histogram demonstrates differences
in frequency distribution across bins. Hence, these findings underscore the
importance of complementary statistical and visualization techniques in as-
sessing preprocessing methods, particularly in studies involving ICA-derived
functional connectivity analysis.
    While the proposed SST-DUNet framework demonstrates promising re-
sults in fMRI skull stripping, there are limitations to consider. The model was

                                      27
trained and evaluated on rat brain datasets, which may affect its performance
when applied to other species or brain types. Also, the segmentation accu-
racy of the developed SST-DUNet model on functional images remains lower
compared to anatomical images, primarily due to the lower quality of func-
tional images. Incorporating cross-modality information between anatomical
and functional images could potentially enhance the accuracy of skull strip-
ping on functional images.

5. Conclusion and Future Work
    In this paper, we introduced a novel approach for automatic preclinical
fMRI skull stripping, integrating a smart Swin Transformer, 3D Dense UNet,
and combo loss. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our
method compared to both learning-based and conventional approaches. Our
evaluation across multiple datasets highlights its reliability, robustness, and
generalizability in preclinical rat fMRI analysis.
    While our proposed skull stripping method demonstrates strong generaliz-
ability, its performance may be influenced by variations in imaging protocols,
scanner types, and dataset characteristics. Fine-tuning or retraining may be
required to achieve optimal results on highly diverse datasets. Additionally,
all our experiments were conducted on rat fMRI data, and further validation
on mouse datasets is needed to confirm the method’s adaptability across dif-
ferent preclinical models. Future work will focus on expanding the dataset
diversity and evaluating the approach across various imaging conditions to
enhance its robustness and applicability.

References
 [1] V. Zerbi, On the use of preclinical imaging to explore the principles of
     brain function in rodent models and their relevance for illnesses of the
     human mind, Translational Psychiatry 12 (2022) 155.

 [2] J. Grandjean, G. Desrosiers-Gregoire, C. Anckaerts, D. Angeles-Valdez,
     F. Ayad, D. A. Barrière, I. Blockx, A. Bortel, M. Broadwater, B. M.
     Cardoso, et al., A consensus protocol for functional connectivity analysis
     in the rat brain, Nature neuroscience 26 (2023) 673–681.

 [3] L.-M. Hsu, S. Wang, P. Ranadive, W. Ban, T.-H. H. Chao, S. Song, D. H.
     Cerri, L. R. Walton, M. A. Broadwater, S.-H. Lee, et al., Automatic

                                      28
    skull stripping of rat and mouse brain mri data using u-net, Frontiers
    in neuroscience 14 (2020) 568614.

 [4] R. Feo, F. Giove, Towards an efficient segmentation of small rodents
     brain: a short critical review, Journal of neuroscience methods 323
     (2019) 82–89.

 [5] S. Jiang, L. Guo, G. Cheng, X. Chen, C. Zhang, Z. Chen, Brain extrac-
     tion from brain mri images based on wasserstein gan and o-net, IEEE
     Access 9 (2021) 136762–136774.

 [6] L. Pei, M. Ak, N. H. M. Tahon, S. Zenkin, S. Alkarawi, A. Kamal,
     M. Yilmaz, L. Chen, M. Er, N. Ak, et al., A general skull stripping
     of multiparametric brain mris using 3d convolutional neural network,
     Scientific Reports 12 (2022) 10826.

 [7] A. Hoopes, J. S. Mora, A. V. Dalca, B. Fischl, M. Hoffmann, Synthstrip:
     Skull-stripping for any brain image, NeuroImage 260 (2022) 119474.

 [8] S. Moazami, D. Ray, D. Pelletier, A. A. Oberai, Probabilistic brain
     extraction in mr images via conditional generative adversarial networks,
     IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (2023).

 [9] K. Nishimaki, K. Ikuta, S. Fujiyama, K. Oishi, H. Iyatomi, Pcss: Skull
     stripping with posture correction from 3d brain mri for diverse imaging
     environment, IEEE Access (2023).

[10] A. Fatima, A. R. Shahid, B. Raza, T. M. Madni, U. I. Janjua, State-of-
     the-art traditional to the machine-and deep-learning-based skull strip-
     ping techniques, models, and algorithms, Journal of Digital Imaging 33
     (2020) 1443–1464.

[11] I. Oguz, H. Zhang, A. Rumple, M. Sonka, Rats: rapid automatic tissue
     segmentation in rodent brain mri, Journal of neuroscience methods 221
     (2014) 175–182.

[12] J. Lohmeier, T. Kaneko, B. Hamm, M. R. Makowski, H. Okano, at-
     lasbrex: Automated template-derived brain extraction in animal mri,
     Scientific reports 9 (2019) 12219.



                                     29
[13] Y. Liu, H. S. Unsal, Y. Tao, N. Zhang, Automatic brain extraction for
     rodent mri images, Neuroinformatics 18 (2020) 395–406.
[14] E. MacNicol, R. Ciric, E. Kim, D. Di Censo, D. Cash, R. A. Poldrack,
     O. Esteban, Atlas-based brain extraction is robust across rat mri studies,
     in: 2021 IEEE 18th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
     (ISBI), IEEE, 2021, pp. 312–315.
[15] J. Nour Eddin, H. Dorez, V. Curcio, Automatic brain extraction and
     brain tissues segmentation on multi-contrast animal mri, Scientific Re-
     ports 13 (2023) 6416.
[16] S. Roy, A. Knutsen, A. Korotcov, A. Bosomtwi, B. Dardzinski, J. A.
     Butman, D. L. Pham, A deep learning framework for brain extraction
     in humans and animals with traumatic brain injury, in: 2018 IEEE 15th
     International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018), IEEE,
     2018, pp. 687–691.
[17] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Er-
     han, V. Vanhoucke, A. Rabinovich, Going deeper with convolutions,
     in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
     recognition, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[18] A. Thai, V. Bui, L. Reyes, L.-C. Chang, Using deep convolutional
     neural network for mouse brain segmentation in dt-mri, in: 2019 IEEE
     International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2019, pp. 6229–
     6231.
[19] R. De Feo, A. Shatillo, A. Sierra, J. M. Valverde, O. Gröhn, F. Giove,
     J. Tohka, Automated joint skull-stripping and segmentation with multi-
     task u-net in large mouse brain mri databases, NeuroImage 229 (2021)
     117734.
[20] S. Liang, X. Yin, L. Huang, J. Huang, J. Yang, X. Wang, L. Peng,
     Y. Zhang, Z. Li, B. Nie, et al., Automatic brain extraction for rat
     magnetic resonance imaging data using u2-net, Physics in Medicine &
     Biology 68 (2023) 205006.
[21] H.-H. Chang, S.-J. Yeh, M.-C. Chiang, S.-T. Hsieh, Ru-net: skull strip-
     ping in rat brain mr images after ischemic stroke with rat u-net, BMC
     Medical Imaging 23 (2023) 1–14.

                                      30
[22] V. A. Porter, B. A. Hobson, B. Foster, P. J. Lein, A. J. Chaudhari,
     Fully automated whole brain segmentation from rat mri scans with a
     convolutional neural network, Journal of Neuroscience Methods (2024)
     110078.

[23] L.-M. Hsu, S. Wang, L. Walton, T.-W. W. Wang, S.-H. Lee, Y.-Y. I.
     Shih, 3d u-net improves automatic brain extraction for isotropic rat
     brain magnetic resonance imaging data, Frontiers in Neuroscience 15
     (2021) 801008.

[24] S. Y. Seo, S.-J. Kim, J. S. Oh, J. Chung, S.-Y. Kim, S. J. Oh, S. Joo,
     J. S. Kim, Unified deep learning-based mouse brain mr segmenta-
     tion: Template-based individual brain positron emission tomography
     volumes-of-interest generation without spatial normalization in mouse
     alzheimer model, Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 14 (2022) 807903.

[25] G. Ruan, J. Liu, Z. An, K. Wu, C. Tong, Q. Liu, P. Liang, Z. Liang,
     W. Chen, X. Zhang, et al., Automated skull stripping in mouse func-
     tional magnetic resonance imaging analysis using 3d u-net, Frontiers in
     Neuroscience 16 (2022) 801769.

[26] F. Shamshad, S. Khan, S. W. Zamir, M. H. Khan, M. Hayat, F. S.
     Khan, H. Fu, Transformers in medical imaging: A survey, Medical
     Image Analysis 88 (2023) 102802.

[27] H. Xiao, L. Li, Q. Liu, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, Transformers in medical image
     segmentation: A review, Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 84
     (2023) 104791.

[28] J. Zhang, Z. Ye, M. Chen, J. Yu, Y. Cheng, Transgraphnet: A novel net-
     work for medical image segmentation based on transformer and graph
     convolution, Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 104 (2025)
     107510.

[29] Y. Lin, Y. Ding, S. Chang, X. Ge, X. Sui, Y. Jiang, Rs2-net: An end-to-
     end deep learning framework for rodent skull stripping in multi-center
     brain mri, NeuroImage 298 (2024) 120769.

[30] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, B. Guo, Swin
     transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows, in:


                                    31
    Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
    vision, 2021, pp. 10012–10022.

[31] A. Hatamizadeh, V. Nath, Y. Tang, D. Yang, H. R. Roth, D. Xu, Swin
     unetr: Swin transformers for semantic segmentation of brain tumors in
     mri images, in: International MICCAI brainlesion workshop, Springer,
     2021, pp. 272–284.

[32] L. Fu, Y. Chen, W. Ji, F. Yang, Sstrans-net: Smart swin transformer
     network for medical image segmentation, Biomedical Signal Processing
     and Control 91 (2024) 106071.

[33] F. Milletari, N. Navab, S.-A. Ahmadi, V-net: Fully convolutional neural
     networks for volumetric medical image segmentation, in: 2016 fourth
     international conference on 3D vision (3DV), Ieee, 2016, pp. 565–571.

[34] T.-Y. Ross, G. Dollár, Focal loss for dense object detection, in: proceed-
     ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
     2017, pp. 2980–2988.

[35] M. Kolařı́k, R. Burget, V. Uher, K. Řı́ha, M. K. Dutta, Optimized high
     resolution 3d dense-u-net network for brain and spine segmentation,
     Applied Sciences 9 (2019) 404.

[36] L. Liu, J. Cheng, Q. Quan, F.-X. Wu, Y.-P. Wang, J. Wang, A survey
     on u-shaped networks in medical image segmentations, Neurocomputing
     409 (2020) 244–258.

[37] S. Soltanpour, A. Chang, D. Madularu, P. Kulkarni, C. Ferris, C. Joslin,
     3d wasserstein generative adversarial network with dense u-net-based
     discriminator for preclinical fmri denoising, Journal of Imaging Infor-
     matics in Medicine (2025) 1–20.

[38] M. Ran, J. Hu, Y. Chen, H. Chen, H. Sun, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Denois-
     ing of 3d magnetic resonance images using a residual encoder–decoder
     wasserstein generative adversarial network, Medical image analysis 55
     (2019) 165–180.

[39] X. Wang, A. T. Leong, R. W. Chan, Y. Liu, E. X. Wu, Thalamic low
     frequency activity facilitates resting-state cortical interhemispheric mri
     functional connectivity, Neuroimage 201 (2019) 115985.

                                      32
[40] A. Ghaw, A. Chunduri, A. Chang, R. J. Ortiz, M. Kozlowska, P. P.
     Kulkarni, C. F. Ferris, Dose-dependent lsd effects on cortical/thalamic
     and cerebellar activity: brain oxygen level–dependent fmri study in
     awake rats, Brain Communications 6 (2024).

[41] M. T. Nasseef, et al., Measuring directed functional connectivity in
     mouse fmri networks using granger causality (2015).

[42] M. T. Nasseef, J. P. Singh, A. T. Ehrlich, M. McNicholas, D. W. Park,
     W. Ma, P. Kulkarni, B. L. Kieffer, E. Darcq, Oxycodone-mediated
     activation of the mu opioid receptor reduces whole brain functional con-
     nectivity in mice, ACS Pharmacology & Translational Science 2 (2019)
     264–274.

[43] M. T. Nasseef, W. Ma, J. P. Singh, N. Dozono, K. Lançon, P. Séguéla,
     E. Darcq, H. Ueda, B. L. Kieffer, Chronic generalized pain disrupts
     whole brain functional connectivity in mice, Brain imaging and behavior
     (2021) 1–11.

[44] P. Charbogne, O. Gardon, E. Martı́n-Garcı́a, H. L. Keyworth, A. Mat-
     sui, A. E. Mechling, T. Bienert, T. Nasseef, A. Robé, L. Moquin, et al.,
     Mu opioid receptors in gamma-aminobutyric acidergic forebrain neurons
     moderate motivation for heroin and palatable food, Biological psychia-
     try 81 (2017) 778–788.

[45] D. Lupinsky, M. T. Nasseef, C. Parent, K. Craig, J. Diorio, T.-Y. Zhang,
     M. J. Meaney, Resting-state fmri reveals altered functional connectiv-
     ity associated with resilience and susceptibility to chronic social defeat
     stress in mouse brain, Molecular Psychiatry (2025) 1–12.




                                      33
