                                                Learning Mechanistic Subtypes of Neurodegeneration
                                                 with a Physics-Informed Variational Autoencoder
                                                                  Mixture Model
arXiv:2509.15124v1 [eess.IV] 18 Sep 2025




                                           Sanduni Pinnawala∗1 , Annabelle Hartanto1,2 , Ivor J. A. Simpson1 , and Peter
                                                                         A. Wijeratne1
                                           1
                                               Sussex AI Centre, School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, UK
                                                    2
                                                      Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, UK


                                                                                  Abstract
                                                       Modelling the underlying mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases
                                                   demands methods that capture heterogeneous and spatially varying dy-
                                                   namics from sparse, high-dimensional neuroimaging data. Integrating par-
                                                   tial diﬀerential equation (PDE) based physics knowledge with machine
                                                   learning provides enhanced interpretability and utility over classic nu-
                                                   merical methods. However, current physics-integrated machine learning
                                                   methods are limited to considering a single PDE, severely limiting their
                                                   application to diseases where multiple mechanisms are responsible for dif-
                                                   ferent groups (i.e., subtypes) and aggravating problems with model mis-
                                                   speciﬁcation and degeneracy. Here, we present a deep generative model
                                                   for learning mixtures of latent dynamic models governed by physics-based
                                                   PDEs, going beyond traditional approaches that assume a single PDE
                                                   structure. Our method integrates reaction-diﬀusion PDEs within a vari-
                                                   ational autoencoder (VAE) mixture model framework, supporting infer-
                                                   ence of subtypes of interpretable latent variables (e.g. diﬀusivity and
                                                   reaction rates) from neuroimaging data. We evaluate our method on syn-
                                                   thetic benchmarks and demonstrate its potential for uncovering mecha-
                                                   nistic subtypes of Alzheimer’s disease progression from positron emission
                                                   tomography (PET) data.


                                           1       Introduction
                                           Neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), are currently hy-
                                           pothesised to be caused by the spread of pathological proteins (tau and amyloid)
                                           across the brain [3]. Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging is routinely
                                           used to obtain surrogate measures of tau and amyloid concentration in vivo; re-
                                           cently, longitudinal PET studies such as the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
                                           Initiative (ADNI) [17] have provided measurements of tau and amyloid spa-
                                           tiotemporal dynamics, supporting the development of mechanistic models of
                                                ∗ m.pinnawala@sussex.ac.uk




                                                                                       1
disease propagation [25]. The spatiotemporal dynamics are commonly mod-
elled mathematically using partial diﬀerential equations (PDEs), which confer
interpretability of model parameters and functional forms. Recently, PDEs
have been integrated into machine learning frameworks to leverage their ability
to scale inference to large, high dimensional datasets [13].
    A challenge with using PDE-based approaches is that the structure and pa-
rameters of the PDEs underlying tau and amyloid propagation are not fully
known. Further complicating the problem, neurodegenerative diseases such as
AD are highly heterogeneous in progression between individuals, with disease
clusters (i.e., subtypes) reported in both tau and amyloid PET [6, 22]. Further-
more, the inverse problems of inferring these PDEs are fundamentally ill-posed,
leading to several fundamental issues, including solution non-uniqueness [2].
Among the inference challenges, model misspeciﬁcation – where the modelled
PDE does not reﬂect the true underlying PDE generating the data – and model
degeneracy – where multiple distinct parameter sets or model structures yield
indistinguishable outputs – are inherent challenges when attempting to learn
biophysical mechanistic models, further exacerbating the problem. These issues
motivate an approach that can account for variability in both data and model
structure to help support reliable inference.

1.1    Contributions
We propose “BrainPhys”, a physics-informed variational autoencoder (VAE)
mixture model of neurodegenerative disease dynamics. Unlike approaches that
assume a single governing PDE, we permit multiple possible PDEs simultane-
ously via mixture modelling, enabling our model to uncover subtypes of disease
mechanisms within the same population. Our primary contributions are as fol-
lows.
  1. We introduce a novel physics-guided VAE mixture model that can learn
     the parameters of multiple PDEs within the same dataset and be used to
     study issues regarding mechanistic model misspeciﬁcation and degeneracy.
  2. We demonstrate our model’s ability to recover clusters of mechanistic mod-
     els and their parameters using synthetic data.
  3. We apply our model to a combined tau and amyloid PET dataset from
     ADNI, and ﬁnd evidence supporting a 2-component mixture model.

1.2    Related Work
Physics-Informed Modelling of Neurodegeneration. Modelling the pro-
gression of neurodegenerative diseases has increasingly relied on physical models
of protein propagation (e.g., prion-like spread) [9, 12, 23]. One inﬂuential line
of work includes [10], where the authors employed Gaussian processes to model
and simulate the dynamics of protein concentration in the brain. However,
these models often assume ﬁxed dynamics and rely on strong priors, whereas
our method enables more ﬂexible latent modelling with physical constraints.

                                       2
    Probabilistic Models for PDE-Constrained Systems. Recent years
have seen a surge in probabilistic approaches for learning solutions to paramet-
ric PDEs. These include Bayesian physics-informed neural networks [24], Gaus-
sian processes with ﬁnite element methods [7], normalising ﬂow models [11],
physics-driven deep latent variable models [21]. Notably, the physics-integrated
VAE framework introduced in [18] incorporates physics constraints within the
VAE architecture. Our approach builds upon this concept and extends to model
structural variability in PDE dynamics. Instead of embedding all sources of un-
certainty within a single neural surrogate, we adopt a mixture-model formula-
tion that enables the latent space to reﬂect distinct PDE regimes (e.g., diﬀerent
reaction dynamics), enabling interpretable modelling of structural variability.
    Interpretable and Structured Latent Representations. There is grow-
ing interest in learning interpretable latent spaces that correspond to physically
meaningful variables. Some approaches focus on disentangled representations
[5, 14], while others embed neural operators or physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) within generative models [13, 20]. Our work contributes to this area
by explicitly designing the latent space to represent a mixture of biophysically
meaningful quantities (e.g., diﬀusion and reaction coeﬃcients).

2      Methodology
2.1     Problem Setting
We consider parameter learning in reaction-diﬀusion type equations of the form:
                     ∂
                        u(x, t) = D∇2 u(x, t) + f (u(x, t)), on Ω,              (1)
                     ∂t
                               ∇u(x, t) · n = 0, on ∂Ω,                         (2)
                              u(x, t) = u0 (x), for t = 0.                      (3)
Here u(x, t) is a scalar-valued function of space, x, and time, t; D is the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient; and f (x, t) is the reaction term; Ω and ∂Ω are the domain and
boundary, respectively; n is the normal unit vector on the surface ∂Ω; and
u0 (x) is the initial ﬁeld at the start of the simulation. Models of this type are
used extensively for modelling biophysical processes, e.g., [8, 16, 19].

2.2     BrainPhys: A VAE Mixture of Physics Models
A schematic overview of our physics-informed VAE mixture model (“BrainPhys”)
is given in Figure 1. The source code is available at 1 . Expanding Equation 1 we
deﬁne the diﬀusion coeﬃcient as D = zx and the source term as f (u) = zr fr (u),

                        ∂ (k)
                           u = zx(k) ∇2 u(k) + zr(k) fr(k) (u(k) ).             (4)
                        ∂t
    1 https://github.com/sanpinnawala/BrainPhys




                                            3
Figure 1: Schematic of the BrainPhys model. Given a sequence of observations,
a categorical encoder infers the mixture weights c, representing the probability of each
candidate model being responsible for the observed dynamics. For each of the K candi-
                                                                                     (k)
date PDE models, a latent encoder infers the corresponding physical parameters zx ,
  (k)
zr . Each component simulates disease dynamics using a diﬀerentiable ODE solver
based on the component-speciﬁc KPP-type equation with the inferred parameters.
The likelihood of the observed data is evaluated under each model, and the total data
likelihood is computed as a weighted sum of these component likelihoods using the
inferred mixture weights. This aggregate likelihood is used to compute and minimise
the negative evidence lower bound (ELBO).


Here, we adopt a KPP-type model [1] to describe the accumulation and propa-
gation of misfolded protein. In our mixture of k = 1, 2, 3, ...K components, each
                                                                              (k)
component corresponds to a distinct formulation of the reaction term, fr ,
                           (k) (k)                                   (k)
with its own coeﬃcients zx ,zr , where the diﬀusion coeﬃcient zx describes
                                                     (k)
protein propagation, and the reaction coeﬃcient zr describes protein accu-
mulation, i.e., we make the form of the diﬀusion term common to all mixture
components but allow the reaction term to vary. This decision was motivated
by the hypothesis that the protein accumulation dynamics are more variable


                                           4
between individuals than the diﬀusion process.

2.2.1   Encoders
Each encoder branch, categorical and latent (Figure 1), maps observed image
sequences to a structured, low-dimensional latent space. Each image is passed
through a convolutional backbone; the resulting features are concatenated with
timestamps and passed to a long short-term memory (LSTM) module. The ﬁnal
LSTM hidden state is passed through task-speciﬁc fully connected layers.

Categorical Encoder. The categorical encoder outputs a vector of logits
representing unnormalised mixture weights over the K components. We apply
the softmax function to obtain a probability vector c ∈ ∆K−1 . At inference
time, we select the most probable component k̂ = arg maxk ck .

Latent Encoder For each component k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, the speciﬁc latent en-
                                                                         (k) (k)
coder outputs the mean and log variance for the physical parameters (zx , zr ).
To ensure positive values, physical parameters are sampled from log-normal dis-
tributions, where z̃ = exp (z) and z ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ). z is reparameterised using the
reparameterisation trick [15].

2.2.2   Decoder
Given the sampled physical parameters z(k) and initial condition X0 , we use
the diﬀerentiable ordinary/partial diﬀerential equation solver (odeint) from
torchdiffeq [4] to integrate the PDE (discretised in space; see Equation 4)
forward in time. The solver outputs X̂ (k) , the predicted dynamics from compo-
nent k:
                X̂ (k) = ODEINT(X0 , f (k) (zx(k) , zr(k) ), {t0 , . . . , tT }) (5)

2.2.3   Evidence Lower Bound
The training objective is adapted to account for the component mixture. This
is achieved by maximising the evidence lower bound (ELBO), incorporating
both the reconstruction likelihood and latent regularisation. The expected log-
likelihood under the mixture model is computed using a log-sum-exp over the
component-wise negative log-likelihoods:
                                N             K               
                                                 (i)     (k,i)
                                X             X
                     Lrecon =         − log     ck exp −LNLL                    (6)
                                i=1           k=1

        (i)
where ck denotes the relaxed mixture weight for component k and sample i,
      (k,i)
and LNLL is the Gaussian negative log-likelihood (see Equation 12 in the Ap-
pendix). LKL(z) account for the divergence between the approximate and prior




                                              5
                                                                                (i)
distributions over physical parameters, weighted by the mixture assignment ck :
           X X (i) h                                                         i
LKL(z) =          ck KL q(zx(i,k) | Xi ) k p(zx ) + KL q(zr(i,k) | Xi ) k p(zr )
            i   k
                                                                           (7)
LKL(c) is the KL divergence between the inferred categorical distribution q(c |
                                                       1
                                                         
X) and the uniform prior over components p(c) = Cat K     :

                          LKL(c) = KL (q(c | X) k p(c))                         (8)

3     Experiments
3.1    Synthetic Data
We generate the synthetic dataset by numerically solving discretised Equation 1
using Runge-Kutta method of order 5 (RK45) with SciPy’s solve_ivp function.
We deﬁne three distinct formulations of the reaction term, referred to as ID 0
(Equation 9), ID 1 (Equation 10), and ID 2 (Equation 11), corresponding to
three distinct clusters. The system is simulated on a 32 × 32 2D spatial grid.
We model initial conditions representing the initial protein concentration with
Gaussian-like distributions over the spatial grid. We impose Neumann boundary
conditions to ensure no ﬂux across the domain boundaries. For each generated
sample, we draw spatial and temporal parameters from uniform distributions:
zx ∈ [0.01, 1.0] and zr ∈ [0.01, 0.1]. Data normalisation scales values to the range
[0, 1]. The training set consists of data samples representing 800 individuals with
3 observations per individual. The validation set consists of 200 data samples.
For evaluation we generate a test set of 1000 samples.

                           ID 0: fr (u) = zr u(1 − u)                           (9)

                           ID 1: fr (u) = zr u(1 − u)2                         (10)
                           ID 2: fr (u) = zr u2 (1 − u)                        (11)

3.2    Alzheimer’s Disease Data
For Alzheimer’s disease data, we use AV145-PET scans and AV45-PET scans
from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) [17]. Access to
the dataset is granted upon request through [17]. We combine the two data
types (tau and amyloid) comprising AD (Alzheimer’s disease), MCI (mild cog-
nitive impairment), and CN (cognitively normal) individuals. We hypothesise
that there should be evidence for more than one cluster in this dataset. The
ADNI data has been preprocessed for longitudinal consistency, including co-
registration to the ﬁrst time point for spatial alignment, spatial normalisation
using SPM, and resampling to a uniform resolution of 6mm³. We apply inten-
sity normalisation across dataset, scaling values to the range [0, 1]. The training
and validation sets consist of 237 and 60 individuals, respectively, each with 3
observations acquired at irregular time points.

                                         6
4     Results
4.1    Synthetic Data




Figure 2: PDE component inference, PDE parameter inference, and pre-
dicted dynamics. (a) Confusion matrix comparing the true cluster assignments
(IDs 0, 1, 2) with the predicted assignments. (b) True vs. predicted distributions
of component assignments. (c) Predicted mixture weights across 100 test samples.
(d) residual distribution for the inferred diﬀusion and reaction coeﬃcients. (e) Model
predictions of a representative test sample.

   Figure 2 presents results from the synthetic data experiment. Figure 2(a)
and Figure 2(b) compare component assignments to the ground truth. Figure
2(c) shows the infered mixture weights for each PDE component across test
samples, representing the model’s belief about which component best explains


                                          7
Figure 3: Evaluation on ADNI data using a diﬀusion and reaction-diﬀusion
mixture model. (a) Learnt parameter distribution. (b) Comparison of the mean
prediction over 100 inferred parameter samples to the observations. Here, t refers
to time in months from the baseline scan. (c) Central horizontal and vertical cross
sections at the ﬁnal reconstructed time point compared to the ground truth.


each test sample. The assigned cluster corresponds to the component with the
highest weight (see Categorical Encoder part of Section 2.2). Figure 2(d) shows
the residual distribution, computed as the diﬀerence between ground truth and
predicted values from the assigned PDE component. The ﬁgure demonstrates
successful inference of true parameters, notably the reaction rate. Figure 2(e)
compares the ground truth to the mean prediction taken over 100 inferred pa-
rameter samples. Here, t=18 is an interpolated time point, and t=36 is an
extrapolated one, demonstrating the model’s ability to generalise both within


                                        8
and beyond the observed data range. Model evidence across multiple runs is
shown in Appendix Figure 5, reﬂecting variability attributable to random ini-
tialisation.

4.2     Alzheimer’s Disease Data
Figure 3 describes results from the ADNI experiment using a two-component
mixture model, where the components correspond to diﬀusion and reaction-
diﬀusion PDEs. These PDEs reﬂect common competing hypotheses for tau and
amyloid pathology. Since our model estimates the posterior over both compo-
nents, we can infer the dynamics and parameters for each subject under either
PDE. We compare the parameter distributions across the validation set and
show reconstructions for a representative subject under both components. We
evaluate the model evidence by recomputing the ELBO for each subset of mix-
ture components at inference time. The evidence is highest when both PDE
components are used (2.07 × 106 ), compared to using only reaction-diﬀusion
(1.96 × 106 ), or only diﬀusion (2.03 × 106 ). The results suggest distinct clus-
ters within the cohort, with the model beneﬁting from access to multiple PDE
components.

5     Discussion
Here, we introduced “BrainPhys”, a novel unsupervised methodology for infer-
ring mixtures of mechanistic models from the same population. We demon-
strated its ability to recover the parameters of PDE models and their respective
weights from synthetic data. We also provided a ﬁrst application of the model
in ADNI, where we found evidence of a mixture of two components in a cohort
of tau and amyloid PET data; however, further analysis is necessary to validate
the clusters. Future work will extend this analysis to larger datasets. Our model
also has potential for identifying sources of model degeneracy (see Figure 4 in
the Appendix), a problem that the mechanistic modelling community has yet to
address. However, several challenges need to be addressed, including (but not
limited to) disentangling factors contributing to ill-posedness, identifying model
degeneracy when there is only one true model in the data, incorporating partial
knowledge of PDE forms (e.g., unknown reaction terms), and inferring clusters
within imaging modalities such as tau or amyloid PET alone.

A       Appendix
A.1     Supplementary Methods
A.1.1    Gaussian Negative Log-Likelihood
                          "                           #
                                  (k)
                  (k,i) 1 kXi − X̂i k2
                 LNLL =                + D log(2πσ 2 )                       (12)
                        2      σ2



                                        9
where D is the dimensionality of Xi and σ 2 is the learned observation noise vari-
ance. KL term regularises the variational posteriors against its corresponding
priors.

A.2     Supplementary Results




Figure 4: Testing model degeneracy on synthetic data. A. Predictions from
the true physics-based model used to generate the data. B. A degenerate model that
achieves similar predictive accuracy but with inaccurate reaction rates, highlighting
potential identiﬁability issues. C. The reaction term is treated as unknown and learnt
using a neural network (MLP), demonstrating the model’s ability to approximate
dynamics in the absence of explicit physical structure.




                                         10
Figure 5: Model evidence for component subsets across runs. Model evidence
(i.e., ELBO) computed for each subset of mixture components across 10 random seeds
in the synthetic data experiment (Section 3.1). The subset IDs correspond to the
component deﬁnitions in Equation 9–11.


References
 [1] G. Adomian. Fisher-Kolmogorov equation. Applied Mathematics Letters, 8(2):51–
     52, March 1995.

 [2] Simon Arridge, Peter Maass, Ozan Öktem, and Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb. Solving
     inverse problems using data-driven models. Acta Numerica, 28:1–174, May 2019.

 [3] Marc Aurel Busche and Bradley T. Hyman. Synergy between amyloid-β and tau
     in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Neuroscience, 23(10):1183–1193, October 2020.

 [4] Ricky T. Q. Chen. Torchdiﬀeq, June 2021.

 [5] Ricky T. Q. Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger Grosse, and David Duvenaud. Isolating
     Sources of Disentanglement in Variational Autoencoders, April 2019.

 [6] Lyduine E. Collij, Gemma Salvadó, Viktor Wottschel, Pierre Schoenmakers, Mar-
     tina Mutti, Leon M Aksman, Alle Meije Wink, Wiesje M van der Flier, Philip
     Scheltens, Pieter Jelle Visser, Bart N.M. Van Berckel, Frederik Barkhof, Sven
     Haller, Juan Domingo Gispert, and Isadora Lopes Alves. Data-driven evidence
     for three distinct patterns of amyloid-β accumulation. Alzheimer’s & Dementia,
     17(S4):e055417, 2021.

 [7] Connor Duﬃn, Edward Cripps, Thomas Stemler, and Mark Girolami. Statistical
     ﬁnite elements for misspeciﬁed models. Proceedings of the National Academy of
     Sciences, 118(2):e2015006118, January 2021.




                                        11
 [8] Radek Erban and S Jonathan Chapman. Stochastic modelling of reaction–
     diﬀusion processes: Algorithms for bimolecular reactions. Physical Biology,
     6(4):046001, August 2009.

 [9] Sara Garbarino and Marco Lorenzi. Modeling and inference of spatio-temporal
     protein dynamics across brain networks, January 2019.

[10] Sara Garbarino, Marco Lorenzi, and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.
     Investigating hypotheses of neurodegeneration by learning dynamical systems of
     protein propagation in the brain. NeuroImage, 235:117980, July 2021.

[11] Ling Guo, Hao Wu, and Tao Zhou. Normalizing ﬁeld ﬂows: Solving forward
     and inverse stochastic diﬀerential equations using physics-informed ﬂow models.
     Journal of Computational Physics, 461:111202, July 2022.

[12] Yasser Iturria-Medina, Roberto C. Sotero, Paule J. Toussaint, and Alan C. Evans.
     Epidemic Spreading Model to Characterize Misfolded Proteins Propagation in Ag-
     ing and Associated Neurodegenerative Disorders. PLoS Computational Biology,
     10(11):e1003956, November 2014.

[13] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G. Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan
     Wang, and Liu Yang. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews
     Physics, 3(6):422–440, May 2021.

[14] Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by Factorising, July 2019.

[15] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes, Decem-
     ber 2022.

[16] Shigeru Kondo and Takashi Miura. Reaction-Diﬀusion Model as a Framework
     for Understanding Biological Pattern Formation. Science, 329(5999):1616–1620,
     September 2010.

[17] R C. Petersen, P S. Aisen, L A. Beckett, M C. Donohue, A C. Gamst, D J.
     Harvey, C R. Jack, W J. Jagust, L M. Shaw, A W. Toga, J Q. Trojanowski, and
     M W. Weiner. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Neurology,
     74(3):201–209, January 2010.

[18] Naoya Takeishi and Alexandros Kalousis. Physics-Integrated Variational Autoen-
     coders for Robust and Interpretable Generative Modeling, October 2021.

[19] Matthew J Thompson, Hans G Othmer, and David M Umulis. A Primer on
     Reaction–Diﬀusion Models in Embryonic Development, pages 1–16. Wiley, 1 edi-
     tion, August 2018.

[20] Juan Diego Toscano, Vivek Oommen, Alan John Varghese, Zongren Zou,
     Nazanin Ahmadi Daryakenari, Chenxi Wu, and George Em Karniadakis. From
     PINNs to PIKANs: Recent Advances in Physics-Informed Machine Learning,
     October 2024.

[21] Arnaud Vadeboncoeur, Ömer Deniz Akyildiz, Ieva Kazlauskaite, Mark Girolami,
     and Fehmi Cirak. Fully probabilistic deep models for forward and inverse problems
     in parametric PDEs. Journal of Computational Physics, 491:112369, October
     2023.


                                         12
[22] Jacob W. Vogel, Alexandra L. Young, Neil P. Oxtoby, Ruben Smith, Rik Os-
     senkoppele, Olof T. Strandberg, Renaud La Joie, Leon M. Aksman, Michel J.
     Grothe, Yasser Iturria-Medina, Michael J. Pontecorvo, Michael D. Devous, Gil D.
     Rabinovici, Daniel C. Alexander, Chul Hyoung Lyoo, Alan C. Evans, and Oskar
     Hansson. Four distinct trajectories of tau deposition identiﬁed in Alzheimer’s
     disease. Nature Medicine, 27(5):871–881, May 2021.

[23] Johannes Weickenmeier, Ellen Kuhl, and Alain Goriely. Multiphysics of Prionlike
     Diseases: Progression and Atrophy. Physical Review Letters, 121(15):158101,
     October 2018.

[24] Liu Yang, Xuhui Meng, and George Em Karniadakis. B-PINNs: Bayesian Physics-
     Informed Neural Networks for Forward and Inverse PDE Problems with Noisy
     Data. Journal of Computational Physics, 425:109913, January 2021.

[25] Alexandra L. Young, Neil P. Oxtoby, Sara Garbarino, Nick C. Fox, Frederik
     Barkhof, Jonathan M. Schott, and Daniel C. Alexander. Data-driven modelling
     of neurodegenerative disease progression: Thinking outside the black box. Nature
     Reviews Neuroscience, 25(2):111–130, February 2024.




                                         13
