                                                 Genetic Regression Analysis of Human Brain
                                              Connectivity Using an Efficient Estimator of Genetic
                                                                  Covariance
                                                    Keshav Motwani, Ali Shojaie, Ariel Rokem, and Eardi Lila
arXiv:2512.08756v1 [stat.AP] 9 Dec 2025




                                                                                      Abstract
                                               Non-invasive measurements of the human brain using magnetic resonance imaging
                                               (MRI) have significantly improved our understanding the brain’s network organization
                                               by enabling measurement of anatomical connections between brain regions (structural
                                               connectivity) and their coactivation (functional connectivity). Heritability analyses
                                               have established that genetics account for considerable intersubject variability in struc-
                                               tural and functional connectivity. However, characterizing how genetics shape the rela-
                                               tionship between structural and functional connectomes remains challenging, since this
                                               association is obscured by unique environmental exposures in observed data. To ad-
                                               dress this, we develop a regression analysis framework that enables characterization of
                                               the relationship between latent genetic contributions to structural and functional con-
                                               nectivity. Implementing the proposed framework requires estimating genetic covariance
                                               matrices in multivariate random effects models, which is computationally intractable
                                               for high-dimensional connectome data using existing methods. We introduce a con-
                                               strained method-of-moments estimator that is several orders of magnitude faster than
                                               existing methods without sacrificing estimation accuracy. For the genetic regression
                                               analysis, we develop regularized estimation approaches, including ridge, lasso, and ten-
                                               sor regression. Applying our method to Human Connectome Project data, we find
                                               that functional connectivity is moderately predictable from structure at the genetic
                                               level (max R2 = 0.34), though it is not directly predictable in the observed data (max
                                               R2 = 0.03). This stark contrast suggests that unique environmental factors mask
                                               strong genetically-encoded structure-function relationships.

                                             Keywords— Structural and functional connectivity, variance components, genetic covariance,
                                          genetic regression analysis



                                          1    Introduction

                                          Striking levels of intersubject heterogeneity have been observed in the structure and func-
                                          tion of the human brain, even within narrowly defined groups of young and healthy subjects

                                                                                           1
(Benson et al. 2022). Brain connectivity is no exception, suggesting that a large variety
of connectivity configurations can result in cognitively healthy subjects (Finn et al. 2015).
Two types of connectivity are commonly studied: structural connectivity, which describes
anatomical connections between brain regions through white matter fibers, and functional
connectivity, which measures the degree of co-activation of brain regions. The set of connec-
tions between pairs of macroscopic brain regions is referred to as the connectome.
   Structural connectivity is believed to provide the physical substrate supporting functional
organization. This structure–function coupling has been extensively characterized (Baum
et al. 2020; Fotiadis et al. 2024; Pan et al. 2025). However, while it is well established
that both structural and functional connectivity are influenced by genetic (Bianco et al.
2023; Colclough et al. 2017; Elliott et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2021) and environmental factors
(Kulick et al. 2020; Pini et al. 2023), the specific aspects of structure–function coupling
that are genetically rooted versus those shaped by environmental exposures are not yet well
understood. Classical analyses of structure–function coupling in neuroimaging studies may
mask underlying relationships when genetic and environmental factors contribute differently
to this coupling. On the other hand, univariate heritability analyses are inadequate for
addressing this question because they fail to capture the complex and multivariate nature
of structure–function coupling.
   In the present work, we developed a latent genetic regression analysis framework that
characterizes genetically encoded structure-function associations. Specifically, we represent
observed connectomes as the sum of latent genetic and environmental components and model
the genetic component of the functional connectome as a linear function of the genetic
component of the structural connectome. To estimate this linear mapping, we develop a
moment-matching genetic covariance estimator with a positive semidefinite constraint, which
we use as a plug-in to estimate the linear regression coefficients within a ridge, lasso, or tensor
regression framework. Our analysis reveals that functional connectomes show substantially


                                                2
Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed approach. Observed connectomes are modeled as the
sum of latent genetic and environmental components. Our methodology characterizes the
relationship between structural and functional connectivity within the genetic component
through the proposed latent genetic regression analysis framework.

higher predictability from structural connectomes at the genetic component level than at the
phenotypic level, suggesting that strong genetically-encoded structure-function relationships
exist but are masked by environmental heterogeneity.


1.1    Motivating data and statistical analysis

In this work, we use data from the Human Connectome Project (HCP), which contains
multimodal imaging data from 1,200 young adults, including diffusion-weighted MRI for
structural connectivity and resting-state functional MRI (Van Essen et al. 2012). Critically,
the dataset includes genetically verified family structures (149 monozygotic twin pairs, 94
dizygotic twin pairs), enabling identification of genetic and environmental contributions.
   Figure 1 illustrates our analysis. Structural connectomes are constructed from diffusion
MRI using tractography to count streamlines connecting each pair of regions. Functional


                                             3
connectomes are constructed from temporal correlations of cortical activation between re-
gions. As we describe in Section 3.4, when we perform classical linear regression to predict
functional connectivity from structural connectivity in the observed data, we find weak
associations (maximum observed R2 = 0.03). This limited predictability motivates our in-
vestigation of whether stronger structure-function associations exist at the genetic level but
are masked by environmental effects. We therefore model the genetic component of func-
tional connectivity as a linear function of the genetic component of structural connectivity,
with regression coefficients capturing intrinsic structure-function associations independent
of environmental factors.
   Implementing the proposed genetic regression analysis at connectome scale presents a
major computational challenge. The analysis requires estimating the joint genetic covari-
ance matrix of structural and functional connectomes, from which the regression parameters
can be estimated. Under our modeling choices, the structural and functional connectomes
together constitute a 4,624-dimensional phenotype, which existing likelihood-based methods
cannot handle. We therefore developed a computationally efficient covariance estimator that
renders the proposed analysis tractable and enables the use of high-dimensional regression
frameworks for our genetic regression analysis.


1.2    Related literature

Our proposed approach bridges methods for heritability analysis and estimation of vari-
ance components. Therefore, in this section we review relevant literature from these fields.
Heritability analyses assess the extent to which trait variation is attributable to genetic fac-
tors, typically using additive genetics and common environment (ACE) models (Maes 2005).
These models are an application of linear mixed models, which partition the total pheno-
typic variance by including random effects for additive genetic (A), common environment
(C), and unique environment (E) components, each defined by its expected covariance struc-


                                               4
ture. Restricted maximum likelihood (REML) is the gold standard for variance component
estimation, but it is computationally prohibitive for multivariate traits. Method-of-moments
estimators are faster (Lindquist et al. 2012) but may produce non-positive estimates. Re-
cently, constrained method-of-moments-based estimators that guarantee nonnegative vari-
ance estimates have been proposed and studied in Zou et al. (2017) and Yue et al. (2021);
these methods improve upon estimation performance of their unconstrained variants while
matching their computational efficiency.
   Previous work on structure-function coupling (Gu et al. 2021) investigated the role of ge-
netics by first estimating subject-specific structure-function correlations and then assessing
the heritability of this univariate trait. This approach enables the use of univariate heri-
tability models, however, it does not directly model population-level relationships between
genetic components of structural and functional connectivity.
   Genetic contributions to multivariate traits, such as entire connectomes, have been typi-
cally investigated using massive univariate analyses, in which heritability is estimated sepa-
rately for each trait. For example, numerous heritability studies of brain connectivity have
analyzed one brain connection at a time using a univariate model; see, e.g., Colclough et al.
(2017) and Ge et al. (2017) and Elliott et al. (2018). Extensions to multidimensional imaging
phenotypes have recently been proposed (Tian et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2022b,c). While these
approaches improve estimation accuracy by borrowing information from neighboring imaging
regions, they mostly focus on estimating heritability and not the genetic and environmental
cross-covariance between distinct regions. Other multidimensional extensions are specifically
designed for twin study designs (Luo et al. 2019; Risk et al. 2021). These methods either rely
on a truncation approach to constrain the covariance estimate to be positive semi-definite,
which may be suboptimal, or require estimating the covariance rank from the scree plot, a
non-trivial task.
   Massively univariate analyses do not estimate the covariance matrices of the genetic com-


                                              5
ponent, and thus do not provide any biological insight into the multidimensional structure
of the genetic contributions. Since several multivariate statistical estimands are functions
of the population covariance matrix, estimating the entire covariance matrix of the genetic
component enables a large class of downstream analyses on the latent genetic component
even though it cannot be directly observed. Although we focus here on linear regression
to characterize the genetic structure-function coupling, our framework also facilitates other
methods, such as principal component analysis and canonical correlation analysis.
   Unlike their univariate counterparts, the estimation of the covariance matrix of latent
multi-dimensional components has received limited attention. REML estimation of the co-
variance matrices using lme4 (Bates et al. 2013) is computationally prohibitive with as few
as 10 traits and 1,000 subjects. Zhou et al. (2014) proposed more efficient algorithms for
computing the REML estimator, though their computational approach does not extend to
models with more than two latent components, such as the additive genetics and common
environment model considered in this work. Commonly used software packages, such as
GCTA (Yang et al. 2011), only support up to two traits. To get around the computational
bottleneck associated with ML-based estimators, method-of-moments-based estimators have
been proposed (Anderson et al. 2021; Ge et al. 2016; Liégeois et al. 2019). However, these
estimators have poor estimation performance compared to REML, particularly when using
familial data in the additive genetics and common environment model. This is due to the
high similarity between the kinship and shared environment indicator matrices, which is es-
pecially relevant in the HCP data analyzed in this work (Ge et al. 2016). Furthermore, these
methods may produce covariance estimates that are not positive semi-definite, complicating
downstream analyses of the latent components.




                                             6
1.3    Our contributions

We introduce a latent genetic regression analysis framework that characterizes genetically-
encoded structure-function associations by modeling relationships between genetic compo-
nents of structural and functional connectivity. Implementing this analysis at the connec-
tome scale requires efficient estimation of genetic and environmental covariance matrices. To
this end, we introduce a constrained method-of-moments estimator that guarantees positive
semidefinite estimates, closely matches REML’s accuracy, and provides substantial computa-
tional speedups. For q connections and n samples, our method requires O(n2 q 2 ) operations
upfront followed by O(min(n, q)3 ) operations per iteration, compared to at least O(n3 q 3 )
operations per iteration for REML (Bates et al. 2015).
   To implement the proposed genetic regression analysis, we developed regularized esti-
mation approaches based on plug-in estimates of the genetic covariance matrix, including
ridge regression, lasso regression, and tensor regression that leverages connectome structure.
These methods estimate linear mappings from the latent genetic component of the structural
connectome to the latent genetic component of the functional connectome, without requiring
direct observation of the genetic component itself.
   Applied to HCP data, we find functional connectivity is substantially more predictable
from structural connectivity at the genetic level than in observed data (maximum R2 : 0.34 vs
0.02). This stark contrast suggests unique environmental factors mask genetically-encoded
relationships, and the uncovered genetically-encoded relationships may provide insights into
the biological architecture of structure-function coupling.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formulates the genetic
regression framework and introduces our proposed genetic covariance estimator. Section 3
applies our methodology to HCP data. Section 4 presents extensive simulations validating
our approach. We end with some concluding remarks in Section 5. Supplementary Materials
contain the derivation of the numerical algorithm, asymptotic theory, additional simulations,

                                              7
and extensions to function-valued phenotypes.


2     Methodology
2.1    Latent genetic regression analysis

To disentangle genetic and environmental factors in shaping brain connectivity, we adopt
a multivariate additive genetics and common environment model, in which a q-dimensional
trait yi is modeled as the sum of independent genetic, common environment, and unique
environment random components:


                                      yi = gi + ci + ei                                   (1)


where gi ∼ N (0, ΣG ), ci ∼ N (0, ΣC ), and ei ∼ N (0, ΣE ). Here, N (0, Σ) denotes the
multivariate normal distribution with mean 0 and covariance matrix Σ and ΣG , ΣC and
ΣE are unknown q × q covariance matrices. Specifically, we model the vectorized structural
and functional connectomes as a multivariate trait yi = yiS , yiF and partition the latent
                                                                 

components conformably, e.g., gi = giS , giF .
                                            

    To characterize the association between structural and functional brain connections
driven by genetic factors, our primary goal is to perform linear regression of the func-
tional connectome on the structural connectome, restricted to the genetic component of
each. Specifically, we fit separate regressions for each functional connection, using the full
structural connectome as the predictor. Formally, for the jth functional connection, we are
interested in the best linear approximation of its genetic component based on the genetic
component of the entire structural connectome:

                                                                         
                                                                      2
                                                      F
                            β ∗G,j = arg min E       gi j − β ⊤ giS                       (2)
                                        β                             2




                                                 8
and the associated proportion of genetic variance explained (genetic-R2 ):

                                                              
                                                 F
                                            Var gi j − β ⊤ giS
                              2
                             RG,j (β) = 1 −         
                                                      F
                                                                 .                        (3)
                                               Var gi j


   These genetic regression coefficients capture the intrinsic associations between structural
and functional connectomes that exist independent of environmental influences, representing
the genetic “blueprint” of structure-function relationships.
   In previous studies of structure–function coupling (Gu et al. 2021), the coupling is typ-
ically characterized by a subject-specific parameter—such as the correlation between the
observed structural and functional connectomes—and the heritability of these parameters is
reported. These approaches implicitly assume that each functional connection influences only
its corresponding structural connection to enable the estimation of subject-specific correla-
tions. In contrast, genetic R2 captures more complex population-level relationships between
structure and function. Additional details on the interpretation of these parameters in the
context of structure–function coupling studies are left to Section 3.
   Although the genetic regression and genetic R2 parameters are defined in terms of latent
unobservable variables, our proposed analysis leverages the observation that they can be
expressed in terms of specific blocks of the genetic covariance matrix, ΣG . We partition the
genetic covariance matrix according to the structural and functional components:

                                                           
                                              ΣS,S
                                               G     ΣS,F
                                                      G
                                   ΣG =             .
                                          F ,S  F ,F
                                         ΣG    ΣG


The genetic regression parameter can then be identified as


                                                                S,F
                          β ∗G,j = arg min β ⊤ ΣS,S     ⊤   j
                                                G β − 2β ΣG ,                             (4)
                                     β




                                                9
and the genetic R2 as

                                           F ,Fj          S,F
                          2               ΣGj      −2β ⊤ ΣG j +β ⊤ ΣS,S
                                                                    G β
                         RG,j (β) = 1 −                  F ,Fj
                                                                          .                (5)
                                                        ΣGj

   Therefore, estimating the genetic covariance matrix, ΣG , enables plug-in estimation of the
genetic regression parameters. The plug-in loss minimization framework naturally accom-
modates regularized approaches, including ridge and lasso regression, as well as extensions to
tensor regression that respect the matrix structure of the structural connectome predictor.
We first introduce our efficient covariance estimation methodology in the next section, then
develop the latent regression estimation methodology in Section 2.3.


2.2     Estimation of covariance matrices

2.2.1   Observed data model

Let y1 , . . . , yn be n identically distributed observations according to the model in (1) and
define Y ∈ Rn×q as the matrix with rows yi⊤ . Similarly defining matrices G, C, and E
for the genetic, common environmental, and unique environmental components across all
subjects, we can write
                                          Y = G+C+E.                                       (6)

For an n × q matrix-valued random variable Z, we say Z ∼ MN (0, D, Σ) follows a matrix-
normal distribution with row-covariance D (describing dependence between subjects) and
column-covariance Σ (describing dependence between traits). This is formally defined as
vec(Z) ∼ N (0, Σ ⊗D), where vec(·) denotes vectorization and ⊗ is the Kronecker product.
   If observations were independent across subjects, we would have G ∼ MN (0, In , ΣG ),
C ∼ MN (0, In , ΣC ), and E ∼ MN (0, In , ΣE ). However, since the row-covariances are the
same, only the sum ΣG + ΣC + ΣE is identifiable from the data—the individual covariance


                                                   10
matrices cannot be separately estimated.
   Identifying the individual covariance matrices therefore requires an experimental design
that includes related subjects with varying degrees of genetic relatedness and shared envi-
ronmental exposure. Let Kn and Hn be n × n positive semi-definite matrices with diagonal
entries equal to 1, where off-diagonal entries quantify the genetic relatedness and shared
environment status between each pair of subjects, respectively:


    G ∼ MN (0n×q , Kn , ΣG ),    C ∼ MN (0n×q , Hn , ΣC ),    E ∼ MN (0n×q , In , ΣE ).    (7)


   Under the model in (6) and (7), the individual covariance matrices ΣG , ΣC , and ΣE
become identifiable provided that Kn , Hn , and In are linearly independent, which is satisfied
when the study includes subjects with varying degrees of genetic relatedness and shared
environmental exposure.
   Existing methods for estimation of the covariance matrices in the multivariate random
effects model are computationally expensive, especially with a large number of traits. To
overcome this challenge, we propose an extension of Yue et al. (2021) to the multivariate
setting, using a constrained method-of-moments estimator rather than maximum likelihood.
Our approach requires only the first two moments of the data, specifically the Kronecker
covariance structure: e.g. cov(vec(G)) = ΣG ⊗ Kn . Therefore, while normal distributions
are used for expositional clarity, the normality assumption is not required for our estimation
procedure.

2.2.2   Restricted multivariate Haseman-Elston regression

The model introduced is a special case of the more general model with K + 1 components:

                                              K
                                              X
                                         Y=         Γk ,                                   (8)
                                              k=0




                                              11
where Γk ∼ MN (0n×q , Dk , Σk ). The model in (6) can be recovered by setting D0 = In ,
D1 = Kn and D2 = Hn so that G = Γ1 , C = Γ2 , and E = Γ0 .
      Classical Haseman-Elston (HE) regression (Haseman et al. 1972) estimates the variance
components in a univariate model using a generalized method-of-moments estimator that
minimizes the squared difference between theoretical and empirical second moments. To
generalize this to the multivariate setting, we use the fact that the second moments of Y
under the model in (8) are given by

                                                        K
                                                        X
                                        E[Yi,j Yl,m ] =   [Σk ]j,m [Dk ]i,l ,                                             (9)
                                                               k=0


for all i, l ∈ [n], j, m ∈ [q]. Therefore, a multivariate extension of HE regression would
minimize

                                               q q n X
                                                     n                                    K
                                                                                                                    !2
                                               X X X                                      X
                 Σ̂0 , . . . , Σ̂K = arg min                           Yi,j Yl,m −              [Σk ]j,m [Dk ]i,l        (10)
                                      Σk
                                               j=1 m=1 i=1 l=1                            k=0
                                               q q                           K                     2
                                               X X                           X
                                  = arg min                  Y:,j Y⊤
                                                                   :,m −       [Σk ]j,m Dk             .                 (11)
                                      Σk
                                               j=1 m=1                        k=0                  F


The optimization problem (11) can be solved for each pair of outcome variables (j, m) ∈
[q]×[q] separately, which can be rewritten as a least-squares linear regression. Specifically, let
     (j,m)
Ỹ           = vec(Y:,j Y⊤
                         :,m ), X̃ = (vec(D0 ), . . . , vec(DK )), and σ
                                                                         (j,m)
                                                                               = ([Σ0 ]j,m , . . . , [ΣK ]j,m )⊤ .
Then solving (11) is equivalent to solving

                                                                    (j,m)                 2
                                      σ̂ (j,m) = arg min Ỹ                 − X̃σ (j,m)
                                                   σ (j,m)                                2



with [Σ̂k ]j,m = [σ̂ (j,m) ]k+1 . This problem has a closed-form solution given by σ̂ (j,m) =
                      (j,m)
(X̃⊤ X̃)−1 X̃⊤ Ỹ             .
      The estimator in (11) has been proposed before by Ge et al. (2016) for heritability


                                                               12
analyses of neuroimaging traits and has been used by Liégeois et al. (2019) and Anderson et
al. (2021). However, this estimator does not return positive semi-definite (PSD) estimates in
general, requiring ad-hoc corrections before performing analyses using the covariance matrix.
A simple correction, analogous to truncating the variance estimates at 0 in the univariate
case, is to truncate the eigenvalues of Σ̂k at 0. We refer to the truncated version of (11) as
the multivariate Haseman-Elston (mvHE) estimator.
    Although truncating the estimate obtained from (11) results in positive semi-definite
estimates of the covariance matrices, these estimates do not minimize (11) subject to the
constraint that each of the Σk is positive semi-definite (PSD). Thus, we consider solving
(11) with positive semi-definiteness constraints, which we call the restricted multivariate
Haseman-Elston (mvREHE) estimator:

                                              q q                    K                              2
                                              X X                    X
                                                               ⊤
                Σ̂0 , . . . , Σ̂K = arg min              Y:,j Y:,m −   [Σk ]j,m Dk                               (12)
                                   Σk ⪰0
                                              j=1 m=1                        k=0                    F
                                              n X
                                                n                          K                    2
                                              X                            X
                              = arg min                  Y⊤
                                                          i,: Y l,: −            [Dk ]i,l Σk        .            (13)
                                   Σk ⪰0
                                              i=1 l=1                      k=0                  F


    The optimization problem in (12) is no longer separable across pairs of outcome variables
due to the PSD constraint. Therefore, to solve this optimization problem, we use a block
coordinate descent algorithm. Specifically, we update Σz with Σk for k ̸= z held fixed at
  (t)
Σ̂k :
                              n X n
                                                                                     !                   2
             (t+1)           X                               X                 (t)
           Σ̂z     = arg min                  Y⊤
                                               i,: Y l,: −          [Dk ]i,l Σ̂k         − [Dk ]i,l Σz       .   (14)
                       Σz ⪰0
                             i=1 l=1                         k̸=z                                        F

Since the objective function in (13) is convex and differentiable, with each of the blocks
constrained to a convex set, block coordinate descent updates will converge to the solution
of (13). The following lemma, proved in Appendix A, allows us to compute each of these
updates in closed form.



                                                    13
Lemma 1. The solution to

                                                        W
                                                        X
                                      Σ̂ = arg min             ∥Sw − aw Σ∥2F
                                              Σ⪰0       w=1



is Σ̂ = UΛ+ U⊤ , where UΛU⊤ is the eigendecomposition of

                                                  W
                                                              !−1 W
                                                  X              X
                                        S=              a2w            aw Sw
                                                  w=1            w=1


and Λ+
     j,j = max(Λj,j , 0).


   Following Lemma 1, to solve (14), we must compute the eigendecomposition of

               n X
                 n
                                 !−1   n X
                                         n
                                                                                              !
               X                       X                                    X           (t)
                   [Dz ]2i,l               [Dz ]i,l            Y⊤
                                                                i,: Y l,: −  [Dk ]i,l Σ̂k
               i=1 l=1                  i=1 l=1                            k̸=z
                                     −1                                                        
               n n                                           n X n                   
              X X                        ⊤        X (t) X                            
                             2             Y Dz Y −
             =
                       [Dz ]i,l 
                                         | {z }         Σ̂k                           .
                                                                      [Dz ]i,l [Dk ]i,l 
               i=1 l=1                              k̸=z
                                                              |i=1 l=1 {z
                                          Wz                                          
                |     {z      }                                                      }
                         Qz,z                                                      Qz,k



To expedite the computation, we can pre-compute Qk,k′ and Wk for all k, k ′ = 1, . . . K as
                                (t)
they do not depend on Σ̂k . If q ≫ n, the eigendecomposition may be computationally
prohibitive. However, the following proposition allows us to compute eigendecompositions
of n × n matrices rather than q × q matrices in each iteration, simply by computing the
compact SVD, Y = UDV⊤ , up front, and computing the mvREHE estimator with data
matrix Y V ∈ Rn×n . Thus, in practice, we must only compute eigendecompositions of
min(n, q) × min(n, q) matrices.

Proposition 1. Let Y = UDV⊤ be the compact SVD of Y . Then, the solution to (13) is
VΣ̃k V⊤ where Σ̃k is the solution to (13) using YV in place of Y.

   Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure. The runtime of our algorithm is only O(nq 2 +

                                                          14
n2 min(q, n)2 +T K min(q, n)3 ), where T is the number of iterations. In comparison, an lme4-
based implementation of REML would involve operations scaling with at least n3 q 3 in each
iteration to simply evaluate the REML criterion. This is because REML involves computing
the Cholesky decomposition of an nq × nq matrix (Bates et al. 2015). Even the optimized
algorithm for REML proposed by Zhou et al. (2014), which only applies to models with 2
components, or K = 1 in (8), has a runtime complexity of O(n3 + T1 nq 2 + T2 nq 6 ), where
T1 is the number of expectation-maximization iterations and T2 is the number of Newton-
Raphson iterations. The computational speed-up of our method makes it very appealing for
high-dimensional and large sample applications.
   Since the unrestricted mvHE estimator in (10) is obtained from a generalized estimating
equation for observations Yi,j Yl,m (i, l ∈ [n], j, m ∈ [q]) with an identity working correlation
matrix, we can leverage results on generalized estimating equations (Xie et al. 2003) to
establish asymptotic properties of our estimators. Specifically, under mild assumptions on
the row covariance matrices Dk , the mvHE estimator is consistent. Additionally, due to
this consistency, if the true Σk are positive definite, the mvHE and mvREHE estimators are
asymptotically equivalent and are thus both consistent. We formally state these results in
the following proposition, relegating the proof to Appendix B.

Proposition 2. Suppose the model in (8) holds and the row covariance matrices Dk each
satisfy [Dk ]i,l ≤ ρ∗h , h = |i − l|, for a sequence {ρ∗h }∞                      ∗
                                                           h=0 satisfying limh→∞ ρh = 0, and the true

column covariance matrices are positive definite: Σk ≻ 0. Then the mvHE and mvREHE

Algorithm 1 Blockwise coordinate descent algorithm for solving (13)
X 1. For z ∈ [K], compute Wz = Y⊤ Dz Y
X 2. Compute Q where Qz,k = ni=1 nl=1 [Dz ]i,l [Dk ]i,l for z, k ∈ [K]
                                     P P

X 3. For t = 1, . . . , T iterations (or until convergence):
XX 3.1 For z = 1, . . . , K:
                                                                       (t)
XXX 3.1.1 Compute eigendecomposition UΛU⊤ = (Wz − k̸=z Qz,k Σ̂k )/Qz,z
                                                             P

XXX 3.1.2 Update Σ(t+1)  z     = UΛ+ U⊤


                                                 15
estimators are consistent.

   The condition of Proposition 2 is commonly satisfied in genetic studies, where the dataset
consists of individuals from many unrelated families, i.e., the genetic relatedness (Kn ) and
shared household (Hn ) matrices are approximately block diagonal up to permutation of the
rows/columns. Despite the asymptotic equivalence of the mvHE and mvREHE estimators,
our simulation results in Section 4 show a clear finite sample advantage to using mvREHE.


2.3    Estimation of latent genetic regression parameters

Once we obtain an estimate Σ̂G , we can define plug-in estimates of the genetic regression
parameters. However, rather than directly solving the plug-in version of (4), the high-
dimensional nature of connectome data motivates the use of regularized estimators to improve
prediction accuracy and prevent overfitting.
   For each functional connection j, we consider the general framework where we solve:

                                             S,S          S,Fj
                       β̂ G,j = arg min β ⊤ Σ̂G β − 2β ⊤ Σ̂G     + P (β)                  (15)
                                 β∈C



where P (β) is a penalty function and C is a constraint set. This framework accommodates
various regularization approaches, and we focus on three specific variants that are well-suited
to connectome data.
   The first two variants employ standard ridge and lasso penalties: P (β) = λ1 ∥β∥22 for ridge
and P (β) = λ2 ∥β∥1 for lasso. These approaches address overfitting through shrinkage but do
not leverage the matrix structure of brain connectivity. The ridge variant admits a closed-
form solution, while the lasso variant can be efficiently solved using standard coordinate
descent with active set and warm start optimizations.
   The third variant, based on tensor regression, exploits the natural matrix organization
of structural connectomes, where connections are arranged by their anatomical origin and

                                               16
destination regions. Rather than treating structural connections as an unstructured vector,
this approach leverages their inherent spatial organization.
    Specifically, let mat(giS ) ∈ Rp×p denote the matrix representation of the genetic com-
ponent of the structural connectome, where p is the number of brain regions. For each
functional connection j, we parameterize the linear predictor as ⟨β 1,j β ⊤          S
                                                                          2,j , mat(gi )⟩F , where

β 1,j , β 2,j ∈ Rp×r and r is the rank parameter. This factorization allows connections that
share anatomical endpoints to have related regression coefficients, reflecting the spatial or-
ganization of brain networks.
    To achieve this structure, we define the constraint set as C = {β : mat(β) = β 1 β ⊤
                                                                                       2 , β1, β2 ∈

Rp×r }, which restricts the matrix form of β to have a low-rank factorization. In practice,
we optimize over the factors β 1,j and β 2,j directly and add penalties on each factor for
identifiability and shrinkage:

                                        S,S                                  S,Fj
β̂ 1,j , β̂ 2,j = arg min vec(β 1 β ⊤  ⊤              ⊤                 ⊤ ⊤
                                                                                    + λ ∥β 1 ∥2F +∥β 2 ∥2F
                                                                                                             
                                    2 ) Σ̂G vec(β 1 β 2 ) − 2 vec(β 1 β 2 ) Σ̂G
                β 1 ,β 2 ∈Rp×r
                                                                                                      (16)
    We solve this optimization problem using alternating minimization: we update β 1 while
holding β 2 fixed, then update β 2 while holding β 1 fixed, and repeat until convergence.
Each individual update admits a closed-form solution, making the optimization compu-
tationally efficient despite the non-convex nature of the overall problem.                  We then set
                       ⊤
β̂ G,j = vec(β̂ 1,j β̂ 2,j ).
    Although we focused on latent genetic regression parameters, these parameters can sim-
ilarly be defined for the common environmental and unique environmental components.
Moreover, while we focus on linear regression analysis here, the estimate Σ̂G serves as a
summary statistic that can be used for many other multivariate data analyses of the genetic
component gi that are functions of estimated covariance matrices, including, for instance,
principal component analysis and canonical correlation analysis.


                                                   17
3     Disentangling genetic and environmental contribu-

      tions in the human connectome
3.1    Data and family structure

We analyze MRI data from 955 participants in the S1200 HCP dataset, including anatom-
ical, diffusion-weighted, and resting-state functional MRIs preprocessed using the minimal
preprocessing HCP pipeline (Glasser et al. 2013). Cortical surfaces are registered across sub-
jects using MSM surface matching (Robinson et al. 2014), then parcellated into 68 regions
of interest (ROIs) using the Desikan-Killiany atlas (Desikan et al. 2006).
    Our sample includes participants with varying genetic relatedness: monozygotic twins,
dizygotic twins, full siblings, half-siblings, and unrelated subjects. We encode this family
structure using a 955 × 955 kinship matrix Kn representing the expected sharing of the
genome, calculated from the HCP pedigree data using SOLAR-ECLIPSE (Koran et al. 2014)
with kinship values of 1 for monozygotic twins, 0.5 for dizygotic twins and full siblings, 0.25
for half-siblings, and 0 for unrelated subjects. The shared environment matrix Hn is defined
as [Hn ]i,l = 1([Kn ]i,l > 0), assuming siblings share the same household.


3.2    Connectome construction

We used structural connectomes that were constructed from diffusion and structural MRI,
as previously described (Kiar et al. 2017). Using the minimally preprocessed HCP data,
diffusion tensors were estimated in each voxel and streamline estimates of brain connection
trajectories were propagated using the Euler delta crossings algorithm, as implemented in
DiPy (Garyfallidis et al. 2014). Each subject’s anatomy was registered to the MNI152 atlas
and fiber streamlines connecting each pair of regions in the Desikan-Killiany atlas were
counted, resulting in a 68 × 68 structural connectome matrix for each subject. The subject-
level connectomes used here are publicly available in the Neurodata portal (Vogelstein et al.


                                              18
2018) and through the AWS Open Data program.
   For functional connectomes, the HCP minimally preprocessed fMRI data provide a time-
series at each location of the mid-thickness surface describing local neuronal activity. For each
ROI, we compute a spatially averaged time-series describing the average neuronal activity
pattern within that ROI using fMRI data from the first session. We use the resulting time-
series to compute a 68 × 68 correlation matrix between ROIs, which we refer to as the
functional connectome.


3.3     Statistical analysis

3.3.1   Estimation of covariance matrices

While numerous representation models for functional and structural connectomes have been
proposed in the literature (Arsigny et al. 2006a,b; Dryden et al. 2009; Lila et al. 2022; Zhang
et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2022a), we adopt a simple vectorization approach commonly used in
neuroscience studies for its interpretability (see, for example, Smith 2015; Xia et al. 2018).
We represent each functional and structural connectome by vectorizing the full 68 × 68 con-
nectivity matrices, yielding a 9,248-dimensional vector per subject (4,624 connections from
each structural and functional matrix). Although this representation introduces redundancy
due to symmetry in the connectivity matrices, it facilitates the tensor regression analysis
without incurring a computational penalty in the covariance estimation step, as the covari-
ance estimation runtime is dominated by the sample size rather than the feature dimension
(see Proposition 1). We use linear regression to adjust for the effects of age, age squared, sex,
intracranial volume, and cortical volume, as in Colclough et al. (2017), and use the residuals
as our mean-zero yi . While we do not enforce the matrix structure of connectomes at the
stage of covariance estimation, we leverage this structure in the downstream latent genetic
tensor regression analysis described in Section 2.3.
   We estimate the covariance matrices Σk using our proposed mvREHE estimator, since


                                               19
multivariate REML is computationally intractable with q = 9, 248 dimensions. Before ap-
plying mvREHE, we rescale the columns of Y to have unit standard deviation, then rescale
the final estimates back to the original scale. This is equivalent to reweighting the loss
function (13), ensuring that estimation focuses on the correlation structure rather than be-
ing dominated by connections with larger raw variances. The reweighted estimator remains
consistent for the true parameter.

3.3.2   Latent genetic and environmental regression analysis of structure-function
        coupling

Gu et al. (2021) previously investigated the genetics of structure-function coupling by first
estimating the correlation between structural and functional connections for each subject—
finding a moderate association with values up to 0.4–and then performing univariate her-
itability analysis on these resulting coefficients. That is, they estimate how much of the
observed within-subject structure-function coupling can be attributed to genetic factors.
   This moderate within-subject coupling does not translate to the population level, where
the structural connectome shows virtually no linear predictive power for functional con-
nections across subjects (Section 3.4). In contrast, we hypothesize that a fundamental,
genetically-encoded association between structure and function exists at the population level,
but that it is obscured by unique environmental exposures.
   Therefore, rather than asking, “how heritable is an individual’s summary of structure-
function coupling? ”, as in Gu et al. (2021), we ask, “what is the population-level linear
relationship between structural and functional connectomes that is encoded in genetics? ”
By separating the genetic component from the environmental component, our methodology
aims to uncover the structure-function coupling that can be inherited. This population-level
framework also allows us to model more complex connectivity patterns in which a functional
connection is influenced by multiple structural connections, which heritability analyses of



                                             20
subject-specific structure–function summaries cannot capture.
   To study standardized effects, we apply the latent genetic regression framework de-
scribed in Section 2.3, but estimate the genetic regression parameters in (2) defined with
g̃i = diag(ΣG )−1/2 gi instead of gi . In practice, this means using the estimated genetic cor-
relation matrix rather than the estimated genetic covariance matrix in the regularized loss
function. This yields regression coefficients that represent the number of standard devia-
tions the genetic component of functional connectivity changes for each standard deviation
change in the genetic component of structural connectivity, holding the genetic component
of all other structural connections fixed.
   In our application to HCP data, we consider all three regularization methods (ridge,
lasso, and tensor regression). To select the optimal regularization parameter and tuning
parameters, we estimate the genetic correlation matrix and regression parameters on one
half of the data and compute the genetic-R2 on the other half, averaging the estimates of
out-of-sample genetic-R2 across splits, then choose the regularization method and tuning
parameters that maximize this averaged out-of-sample genetic R2 . This approach allows
us to determine which regularization strategy best captures the genetic structure-function
relationships for each connection while avoiding overfitting.
   We perform the same regression analysis on the common environment and unique envi-
ronment components to compare linear predictability across latent components. This enables
us to determine whether structure-function couplings are primarily driven by genetic factors,
environmental factors, or a combination of both. We also perform classical linear regression
using the observed data to compare against traditional analyses of connectome data and to
assess how much the genetic decomposition reveals about structure-function coupling that
would otherwise be masked in the observed data.
   We report the out-of-sample genetic R2 values for the selected method and tuning pa-
rameters. The resulting genetic R2 values quantify the proportion of variance in each func-


                                              21
tional connection’s genetic component that can be explained by a linear function of the
genetic components of all structural connections. High genetic R2 values indicate strong
genetically-encoded structure-function coupling, while low values suggest little evidence of a
linear relationship between the genetic components of structural and functional connectivity.


3.4     Results

3.4.1   Genetic and environmental regression analysis of the structure-function
        coupling

Figure 2 shows the out-of-sample estimates of the proportion of variance of each functional
connection that can be explained by all structural connections for the observed data (ob-
served R2 ) and each latent component (genetic R2 , common environment R2 , and unique
environment R2 ). Each R2 value represents the best performance across all three regular-
ized latent regression methods and their respective tuning parameters for that functional
connection. The results reveal striking differences in structure-function predictability across
observed and latent components.
   In the observed data, structural connections show minimal linear predictive power for
functional connections, with most R2 values near zero and a maximum of only 0.03. However,
when restricted to latent components, a clear pattern emerges. The genetic component
shows the strongest structure-function coupling, with many functional connections exhibiting
substantial predictability from structural connections (maximum R2 = 0.34). The common
environment component shows moderate predictability (maximum R2 = 0.17), while the
unique environment component shows virtually no linear relationship between structural
and functional connectivity (maximum R2 = 0.04).
   These results suggest that the apparent lack of structure-function coupling in observed
data masks a strong genetically-encoded relationship that is obscured by unique environ-



                                              22
 a     Observed R2 (min = 0 , max = 0.03 )                         b       Genetic R2 (min = 0 , max = 0.34 )                                                 2
                                                                                                                                      c Common Env R (min = 0 , max = 0.17 )                            d     Unique Env R2 (min = 0 , max = 0.04 )




                                                 SMH




                                                                                                                   SMH




                                                                                                                                                                                      SMH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SMH
             COP




                         DFM




                                                                               COP




                                                                                           DFM




                                                                                                                                                  COP




                                                                                                                                                              DFM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DFM
                                           PCC




                                                                                                             PCC




                                                                                                                                                                                PCC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PCC
                                     OTH




                                                                                                       OTH




                                                                                                                                                                          OTH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OTH
       AUD




                                                                         AUD




                                                                                                                                            AUD




                                                                                                                                                                                                              AUD
                               FPT




                                                                                                 FPT




                                                                                                                                                                    FPT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FPT
                   DAT




                                                                                     DAT




                                                                                                                                                        DAT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DAT
                                                       VAT




                                                                                                                         VAT




                                                                                                                                                                                            VAT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VAT
                                                             VIS




                                                                                                                               VIS




                                                                                                                                                                                                  VIS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIS
 AUD                                                               AUD                                                                AUD                                                               AUD

 COP                                                               COP                                                                COP                                                               COP

 DAT                                                               DAT                                                                DAT                                                               DAT



 DFM                                                               DFM                                                                DFM                                                               DFM



 FPT                                                               FPT                                                                FPT                                                               FPT

 OTH                                                               OTH                                                                OTH                                                               OTH

 PCC                                                               PCC                                                                PCC                                                               PCC

 SMH                                                               SMH                                                                SMH                                                               SMH

 VAT                                                               VAT                                                                VAT                                                               VAT


 VIS                                                               VIS                                                                VIS                                                               VIS




Figure 2: Proportion of variance explained (R2 ) in functional connectivity by structural
connectivity for each functional connection. Results are shown for (a) observed data and
decomposed latent components: (b) genetic, (c) common environment, and (d) unique envi-
ronment. Each cell represents the out-of-sample R2 for predicting one functional connection
using all structural connections as predictors. Darker shades of red indicate higher pre-
dictability.

mental factors affecting each individual differently.
       Different mechanisms could explain the observed phenomenon of high predictability
within the genetic component (Van Rheenen et al. 2019), such as horizontal pleiotropy,
where a shared set of genes contributes directly or through intermediate endophenotypes to
both structural and functional connectivity. Alternatively, a causal relationship could exist,
i.e., vertical pleiotropy, although the observed high predictability may also be due to spuri-
ous pleiotropy, such as biases in the imaging pipelines used to produce surrogate estimates
of functional and structural connectivity.
       Figure 3 shows the estimated genetic regression coefficients from all three regularization
methods for a functional connection within the default mode network (DFM), which has the
highest genetic R2 (0.34). The three methods achieved different out-of-sample genetic R2
values: ridge regression (R2 = 0.34), lasso regression (R2 = 0.27), and tensor regression (R2
= 0.26). We display results from all three methods to contrast their regularization effects.
       Since the structural connectome is symmetric, we handle the coefficient visualization
differently across methods for interpretability. For ridge and lasso (panels a-b), we sum



                                                                                                                                     23
coefficients from symmetric pairs of structural connections since only their sum affects pre-
diction, displaying results in the lower triangle with upper triangle set to zero. For tensor
regression (panel c), we preserve the estimated coefficient matrix to illustrate the low-rank
structure.
   The coefficient patterns reflect each method’s regularization properties: ridge produces
distributed shrinkage across connections, lasso yields sparse selection, and tensor regression
captures structured spatial relationships through its rank constraint. Interestingly, ridge re-
gression achieves the highest performance for this DFM connection despite tensor regression’s
incorporation of the structural connectome’s matrix structure, suggesting that distributed
shrinkage may be more beneficial than structural constraints for this particular connection.
   Across all functional connections, tensor regression is optimal for 44.8% of connections,
ridge regression for 44.2%, and lasso regression for 11.0%, indicating that no single regular-
ization approach dominates and that the optimal method depends on the specific functional
connection being modeled. These differences demonstrate how regularization choice affects
both the performance and interpretability of estimated structure-function coupling in the
genetic component.




                                              24
    a Genetic Matrix Regression Coefficients                               b Genetic Lasso Regression Coefficients                                     c Genetic Ridge Regression Coefficients




                                                         SMH




                                                                                                                                   SMH




                                                                                                                                                                                                            SMH
                COP




                               DFM




                                                                                       COP




                                                                                                      DFM




                                                                                                                                                                   COP




                                                                                                                                                                                   DFM
                                                  PCC




                                                                                                                             PCC




                                                                                                                                                                                                      PCC
                                           OTH




                                                                                                                       OTH




                                                                                                                                                                                                OTH
          AUD




                                                                                 AUD




                                                                                                                                                             AUD
                                     FPT




                                                                                                                 FPT




                                                                                                                                                                                          FPT
                      DAT




                                                                                              DAT




                                                                                                                                                                           DAT
                                                               VAT




                                                                                                                                           VAT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VAT
                                                                     VIS




                                                                                                                                                 VIS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIS
    AUD                                                                    AUD                                                                         AUD

    COP                                                                    COP                                                                         COP

    DAT                                                                    DAT                                                                         DAT


    DFM                                                                    DFM                                                                         DFM


    FPT                                                                    FPT                                                                         FPT

    OTH                                                                    OTH                                                                         OTH
    PCC                                                                    PCC                                                                         PCC
    SMH                                                                    SMH                                                                         SMH

    VAT                                                                    VAT                                                                         VAT


    VIS                                                                    VIS                                                                         VIS




                            −0.005   0           0.005                                       −0.04   −0.02       0       0.02       0.04                                 −0.01   −0.005   0       0.005           0.01




Figure 3: Estimated genetic regression coefficients for predicting a functional connection
within the default mode network (DFM) using all structural connections as predictors. Re-
sults shown for (a) tensor regression, (b) lasso regression, and (c) ridge regression. For ridge
and lasso, coefficients from symmetric structural connection pairs are summed and displayed
in the lower triangle. For tensor regression, the full coefficient matrix structure is preserved
to illustrate the low-rank structure.

4         Simulations

In this section, we consider a simulation study based on a related analysis of the HCP
data, in an effort to validate our choice of methodology. That is, we simulate data from
the additive genetics and common environment model in (6), where the row-covariance and
column-covariance matrices are set based on estimates from a coarser-resolution analysis of
the HCP data.
      We group the 68 regions into 10 functional communities and analyze the connectivity at
this resolution. For structural connectomes, we sum all structural connections within each
community to obtain inter-community connection strengths. For functional connectomes,
we average the time series of all regions within each community and compute correlations on
these averaged time series. We then apply the mvREHE estimator to estimate the genetic,
common environment, and unique environment covariance matrices, which serve as the true



                                                                                                            25
parameters for our simulation model.
   The genetic relatedness matrix Kn is defined as follows: if the sample size n ≤ 1, 000,
Kn is the top left n × n block of the HCP kinship matrix; if n > 1, 000, then Kn is an n × n
block diagonal matrix with blocks defined by the 1, 000 × 1, 000 HCP kinship matrix. As in
Section 3.3.1, we set the common household matrix Hn to be a binarized version of Kn .
   In each replicate, we sample observed data from the model in (6) and estimate Σk using
mvHE and mvREHE. We do not use multivariate REML as it is computationally intractable
with q = 200 dimensions. For comparison with existing univariate approaches, we also
estimate the diagonal elements of Σk using univariate HE, REHE, and REML estimators
applied separately to each trait. We perform 50 replications for each simulation setting.
   In Figure 4a, we compare the runtime of multivariate and univariate estimators. The
multivariate methods mvHE and mvREHE show virtually identical computational times,
with execution times under a couple of seconds even at n = 8, 000. The positive definite
constraint in mvREHE adds no computational burden due to our efficient algorithm. Both
multivariate methods are orders of magnitude faster than multiple univariate estimators,
particularly REML, while providing full covariance matrices rather than just diagonal ele-
ments.
   We next compare the estimation error of the entire covariance matrix using mvHE and
mvREHE, the only computationally feasible multivariate estimators in this setting. Figure 4b
shows results for the genetic component, with results for other components in Figure S5
in the Supplementary Materials. The positive semi-definite constraint in mvREHE yields
considerably lower estimation error than the truncation-based mvHE, particularly at smaller
sample sizes, while having nearly identical runtime performance.
   Finally, we compare the prediction performance of latent genetic regression analysis using
mvHE and mvREHE for the plug-in covariance estimates. We evaluate all combinations of
covariance estimation methods (mvHE vs mvREHE) and regularization approaches (ridge,


                                             26
 a                                                       b                                                              c                         0.4
                                                                       12.5




                                                                                                                              across j ∈ F
                   3
                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                       10.0
  log10(seconds)




                                                                 G 2
                                                            ^ − Σ ||
                   2
                                                                                                                                                  0.2




                                                                                                                         Gj(βGj)

                                                                                                                                        Gj(βGj)
                                                                        7.5




                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                            ^
                                                             G
                   1




                                                                                                                        R2*

                                                                                                                                       R2*
                                                          ||Σ
                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                        5.0




                                                                                                                                Average
                   0
                                                                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                        2.5

                       2000     4000    6000      8000                         2000          4000       6000     8000                                   2000     4000     6000      8000
                                  n                                                            n                                                                   n

                       Method      HE      REHE          REML                 Multivariate          Univariate   Regression Method                      matrix    lasso     ridge




Figure 4: Performance of the proposed estimation framework across different analyses. (a)
Runtime comparison of multivariate methods (mvHE, mvREHE) versus univariate methods
(HE, REHE, REML), (b) spectral-norm error of estimated genetic covariance matrix Σ̂G
comparing mvHE and mvREHE, and (c) prediction performance of latent genetic regres-
sion analysis showing the average ratio of achieved genetic-R2 to oracle genetic-R2 across
functional connections for different combinations of covariance estimation methods and reg-
ularization approaches, all with varying sample size n and q = 200 fixed.

lasso, tensor regression). Figure 4c shows the average ratio of achieved genetic-R2 to the
oracle genetic-R2 across all functional connections, where the oracle represents the theoreti-
cal maximum achievable with the true covariance matrix. Values closer to 1 indicate better
recovery of the true predictive relationships in the genetic component. The results demon-
strate that mvREHE consistently outperforms mvHE across all regularization methods, with
the performance gap particularly pronounced at larger sample sizes. Results for the common
environmental and unique environmental components are shown in Figure S6. This confirms
that the improved covariance estimation accuracy of mvREHE translates directly into better
downstream prediction performance across all latent components.
              As it was not computationally feasible to directly compare mvREHE with the multivariate
REML estimator with q = 200, we perform additional low-dimensional simulations (q ≤
10) in Section C.2 of the Supplementary Materials. In Figure S7, we observe that the
estimation performance of mvREHE nearly exactly matches that of multivariate REML, both



                                                                                             27
for estimation of the entire covariance matrix as well as heritability proportions, while being
nearly three orders of magnitude faster than the when q = 5 and five orders of magnitude
faster when q = 10.
    In summary, these simulation results suggest that the mvREHE estimator provides the
best of both worlds in terms of computational efficiency and estimation accuracy in the
data-inspired settings considered.


5     Discussion

We developed a novel latent genetic regression analysis framework that characterizes re-
lationships between genetic components of brain connectivity. Unlike previous approaches
that estimate subject-specific structure-function coupling and then assess its heritability (Gu
et al. 2021), our method directly models genetic contributions, additionally allowing for a
population-level understanding of complex interaction patterns where functional connections
can be influenced by multiple structural connections.
    The computational feasibility of this analysis required methodological innovation in multi-
variate variance component estimation. Existing estimators like multivariate REML are com-
putationally intractable for high-dimensional connectome data. We introduce a constrained
method-of-moments estimator that guarantees positive semi-definite covariance estimates.
Simulation studies demonstrate that our block coordinate descent algorithm efficiently incor-
porates the positive semi-definite constraint while maintaining practically identical runtime
as the unconstrained estimator, and that the method nearly matches multivariate REML’s
estimation accuracy while providing dramatic computational speedups.
    Our analysis reveals that functional connectivity is substantially more predictable from
structural connectivity when restricted to genetic components (maximum R2 = 0.34) com-
pared to observed data, which show minimal predictive relationships (maximum R2 = 0.03).
This finding suggests that unique environmental factors mask genetically-encoded relation-

                                              28
ships between structural and functional connectomes.
    The proposed method extends well beyond neuroscience applications, applying to any
multivariate setting where observed data represents the sum of latent genetic and environ-
mental components. This enables the analysis of complex, high-dimensional phenotypes
which can be modelled as the sum of independent latent components, which was previously
computationally infeasible. By estimating entire covariance matrices rather than just vari-
ances, our method enables a diverse set of multivariate analyses restricted to individual latent
components, including principal component analysis, canonical correlation analysis, and the
regression framework demonstrated here. These analyses fundamentally rely on covariance
structure.



6     Code availability

An open-source R package implementing the proposed estimator is available at https://
github.com/keshav-motwani/mvREHE.



References

Anderson, K. M. et al. (2021). “Heritability of Individualized Cortical Network Topography”.
    In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118.9, e2016271118.
Arsigny, V. et al. (2006a). “Geometric Means in a Novel Vector Space Structure on Symmetric
    Positive-Definite Matrices”. In: SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications 29.1,
    pp. 328–347.
— (2006b). “Log-Euclidean Metrics for Fast and Simple Calculus on Diffusion Tensors”. In:
    Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 56.2, pp. 411–421.




                                              29
Bates, D. et al. (2013). “Fast and Elegant Numerical Linear Algebra Using the Rcppeigen
   Package”. In: Journal of Statistical Software 52.5, pp. 1–24.
Bates, D. et al. (2015). “Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using Lme4”. In: Journal of
   Statistical Software 67.1, pp. 1–48.
Baum, G. L. et al. (2020). “Development of structure–function coupling in human brain
   networks during youth”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117.1,
   pp. 771–778.
Benson, N. C. et al. (2022). “Variability of the Surface Area of the V1, V2, and V3 Maps in
   a Large Sample of Human Observers”. In: The Journal of Neuroscience 42.46, pp. 8629–
   8646.
Bianco, M. G. et al. (2023). “Heritability of Human “Directed” Functional Connectome”.
   In: Brain and Behavior 13.5, e2839.
Colclough, G. L. et al. (2017). “The Heritability of Multi-Modal Connectivity in Human
   Brain Activity”. In: eLife 6, pp. 1–19.
Desikan, R. S. et al. (2006). “An Automated Labeling System for Subdividing the Human
   Cerebral Cortex on MRI Scans into Gyral Based Regions of Interest”. In: NeuroImage
   31.3, pp. 968–980.
Dryden, I. L. et al. (2009). “Non-Euclidean Statistics for Covariance Matrices, with Ap-
   plications to Diffusion Tensor Imaging”. In: Annals of Applied Statistics 3.3, pp. 1102–
   1123.
Elliott, L. T. et al. (2018). “Genome-Wide Association Studies of Brain Imaging Phenotypes
   in UK Biobank”. In: Nature 562.7726, pp. 210–216.
Finn, E. S. et al. (2015). “Functional Connectome Fingerprinting: Identifying Individuals
   Using Patterns of Brain Connectivity”. In: Nature Neuroscience 18.11, pp. 1664–1671.
Fotiadis, P. et al. (2024). “Structure–function coupling in macroscale human brain networks”.
   In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience 25.10, pp. 688–704.


                                             30
Garyfallidis, E. et al. (2014). “Dipy, a Library for the Analysis of Diffusion MRI Data”. In:
   Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 8.
Ge, T. et al. (2017). “Heritability analysis with repeat measurements and its application
   to resting-state functional connectivity”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
   Sciences 114.21, pp. 5521–5526.
Ge, T. et al. (2016). “Multidimensional Heritability Analysis of Neuroanatomical Shape”.
   In: Nature Communications 7.
Glasser, M. F. et al. (2013). “The Minimal Preprocessing Pipelines for the Human Connec-
   tome Project”. In: NeuroImage 80, pp. 105–124.
Gu, Z. et al. (2021). “Heritability and Interindividual Variability of Regional Structure-
   Function Coupling”. In: Nature Communications 12.1, p. 4894.
Haseman, J. K. et al. (1972). “The Investigation of Linkage between a Quantitative Trait
   and a Marker Locus”. In: Behavior Genetics 2.1, pp. 3–19.
Kiar, G. et al. (2017). A High-Throughput Pipeline Identifies Robust Connectomes But Trou-
   blesome Variability. Preprint.
Koran, M. E. et al. (2014). “On Study Design in Neuroimaging Heritability Analyses”. In:
   SPIE Medical Imaging. Ed. by S. Ourselin et al. San Diego, California, USA, 90342P.
Kulick, E. R. et al. (2020). “Long-Term Exposure to Air Pollution and Trajectories of Cog-
   nitive Decline among Older Adults”. In: Neurology 94.17, e1782–e1792.
Liégeois, R. et al. (2019). “Resting Brain Dynamics at Different Timescales Capture Distinct
   Aspects of Human Behavior”. In: Nature Communications 10.1.
Lila, E. et al. (2022). “Functional Random Effects Modeling of Brain Shape and Connectiv-
   ity”. In: Annals of Applied Statistics 16.4.
Lindquist, M. A. et al. (2012). “Estimating and Testing Variance Components in a Multi-level
   GLM”. In: NeuroImage 59.1, pp. 490–501.




                                              31
Luo, S. et al. (2019). “FSEM: Functional Structural Equation Models for Twin Functional
   Data”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 114.525, pp. 344–357.
Maes, H. H. (2005). “ACE Model”. In: Encyclopedia of Statistics in Behavioral Science. John
   Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Pan, R. et al. (2025). “Mapping individual differences in intermodal coupling in neurodevel-
   opment”. In: Imaging Neuroscience 3, IMAG–a.
Pini, L. et al. (2023). “The pollutome-connectome axis: a putative mechanism to explain
   pollution effects on neurodegeneration”. In: Ageing Research Reviews 86, p. 101867.
Risk, B. B. et al. (2021). “ACE of Space: Estimating Genetic Components of High-Dimensional
   Imaging Data”. In: Biostatistics 22.1, pp. 131–147.
Robinson, E. C. et al. (2014). “MSM: A New Flexible Framework for Multimodal Surface
   Matching”. In: NeuroImage 100, pp. 414–426.
Smith, S. (2015). “Linking Cognition to Brain Connectivity”. In: Nature Neuroscience 19.1,
   pp. 7–9.
Tian, X. et al. (2023). Bayesian Mixed Model Inference for Genetic Association under Related
   Samples with Brain Network Phenotype.
Van Essen, D. C. et al. (2012). “The Human Connectome Project: A Data Acquisition
   Perspective”. In: NeuroImage 62.4, pp. 2222–2231.
Van Rheenen, W. et al. (2019). “Genetic Correlations of Polygenic Disease Traits: From
   Theory to Practice”. In: Nature Reviews Genetics 20.10, pp. 567–581.
Vogelstein, J. T. et al. (2018). “A Community-Developed Open-Source Computational Ecosys-
   tem for Big Neuro Data”. In: Nature Methods 15.11, pp. 846–847.
Xia, C. H. et al. (2018). “Linked Dimensions of Psychopathology and Connectivity in Func-
   tional Brain Networks”. In: Nature Communications 9.1.
Xie, M. et al. (2003). “Asymptotics for generalized estimating equations with large cluster
   sizes”. In: The Annals of Statistics 31.1, pp. 310–347.


                                             32
Yang, J. et al. (2011). “GCTA: A Tool for Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis”. In: The
   American Journal of Human Genetics 88.1, pp. 76–82.
Yao, F. et al. (2005). “Functional Data Analysis for Sparse Longitudinal Data”. In: Journal
   of the American Statistical Association 100.470, pp. 577–590.
Yue, K. et al. (2021). “REHE: Fast variance components estimation for linear mixed models”.
   In: Genetic epidemiology 45.8, pp. 891–905.
Zhang, Z. et al. (2019). “Tensor Network Factorizations: Relationships between Brain Struc-
   tural Connectomes and Traits”. In: NeuroImage 197.April, pp. 330–343.
Zhao, Y. et al. (2022a). Covariance-on-Covariance Regression.
Zhao, Y. et al. (2022b). “Bayesian Sparse Heritability Analysis with High-Dimensional Neu-
   roimaging Phenotypes”. In: Biostatistics 23.2, pp. 467–484.
Zhao, Y. et al. (2022c). Genetic Underpinnings of Brain Structural Connectome for Young
   Adults.
Zhou, X. et al. (2014). “Efficient multivariate linear mixed model algorithms for genome-wide
   association studies”. In: Nature methods 11.4, pp. 407–409.
Zou, T. et al. (2017). “Covariance regression analysis”. In: Journal of the American Statistical
   Association 112.517, pp. 266–281.




                                              33
Supplementary Materials
A     Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Expressing the Frobenius norm as the trace of a quadratic form, using linearity of
the trace operator, and applying an eigendecomposition gives us that
                                      W
                                      X
                       Σ̂ = arg min         ∥Sw − aw Σ∥2F
                              Σ⪰0     w=1
                                                     !−1 W               2
                                        W
                                        X               X
                          = arg min            a2w           aw Sw − Σ
                              Σ⪰0       w=1            w=1
                                                                         F
                          = arg min ∥S − Σ∥2F
                              Σ⪰0
                                                        2
                          = arg min UΛU⊤ − Σ F
                              Σ⪰0
                                                        2
                          = arg min Λ − U⊤ Σ U F .
                              Σ⪰0


Since Λ is diagonal, we can restrict ourselves to the case where U⊤ Σ U is also diagonal.
Note that the optimal Σ is PSD if and only if U⊤ Σ U is PSD, since U is an orthogonal
matrix. Thus, the diagonal elements of U⊤ Σ U must be non-negative. If λj ≥ 0, then the
best case is that the jth diagonal element of U⊤ Σ U is also λj . If λj < 0, then the best
case is that the jth diagonal element of U⊤ Σ U is 0. Hence, the minimizer is achieved by
Σ̂ = UΛ+ U⊤ .




                                               34
B       Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. First, wePdefine some notation. Let Ẏ = vec(Y⊤ ). Then under the model in equation
(8), Ẏ ∼ N (0, K k=0 Dk ⊗ Σk ). Let Ejl is a q by q matrix with 1 in the j, l and l, j entries
and 0 elsewhere. Then equation (10) can be written as the solution to
                                                      K
                                              ⊤       X
                             arg min∥ẎẎ −                 Dk ⊗ Σk ∥2F                                          (17)
                                  Σk
                                                      k=0
                                                        K X
                                                  ⊤     X
                             = arg min∥ẎẎ −                     [Σk ]j,l (Dk ⊗ Ejl )∥2F                        (18)
                                       Σk
                                                        k=0 j≥l

                             = arg min∥Ỹ − X̃σ∥22                                                               (19)
                                       σ

                                                  ⊤
where σ g(k,j,l) := [Σk ]j,l , Ỹ = vec(ẎẎ ), and X̃:,g(k,j,l) = vec(Dk ⊗ Ejl ) and g is a function
which linearizes the indices k ∈ {0} ∪ [K], j, l ∈ [q] with j ≥ l:

                                  kq(q + 1)                    l(l − 1)
                   g(k, j, l) =             + (l − 1)(q + 1) −          + j − (l − 1).
                                      2                            2
Therefore, (17) is the ordinary least squares estimate of σ in the linear model

                                                  Ỹ = X̃σ + δ

where cov(δ) = R. We can see that the pre-truncation mvHE estimator is the special
case of a generalized estimating equation estimator with the identity matrix as the working
correlation matrix. Thus, as in Yue et al. (2021), we use results from Xie et al. (2003) on
asymptotics of generalized estimating equations.
   One p can verify that Assumption 1 implies that the correlation of δ is bounded by
|Ra,b / Ra,a Rb,b |< ρh with h = |a − b| for a sequence ρh with limh→∞ ρh = 0, since

cov(Yi,j Yl,m , Yi′ ,j ′ Yl′ ,m′ ) = E(Yi,j Yl,m Yi′ ,j ′ Yl′ ,m′ ) − E(Yi,j Yl,m )E(Yi′ ,j ′ Yl′ ,m′ )
                                   = E(Yi,j Yi′ ,j ′ )E(Yl,m Yl′ ,m′ ) + E(Yi,j Yl′ ,m′ )E(Yl,m Yi′ ,j ′ )
                                   = cov(Yi,j , Yi′ ,j ′ ) cov(Yl,m , Yl′ ,m′ ) + cov(Yi,j , Yl′ ,m′ ) cov(Yl,m , Yi′ ,j ′ )

and
                   cov(Yi,j , Yl,m ) = E(Yi,j Yl,m ) = [ΣE ]j,m [In ]i,l + [ΣG ]j,m [Kn ]i,l .
Therefore, under this assumption, the pre-truncation mvHE estimator is consistent (Xie et
al. 2003; Yue et al. 2021). Additionally, the truncated mvHE estimator is consistent by the
continuous mapping theorem.
    Now we argue asymptotic equivalence of the mvHE and mvREHE estimators if the true
Σk are positive definite. Note that the mvREHE estimate is the same as the mvHE estimate
if the covariance matrices estimated by mvHE are PSD. By openness of the space of positive

                                                            35
definite matrices, there exists an open ball of positive definite matrices around the true
Σk which the mvHE estimate will asymptotically belong to, by consistency. Therefore, the
mvREHE estimate will asymptotically be the same as the the mvHE estimate, and will also
be consistent.


C                   Supplemental Simulation Results
C.1                 Data-inspired simulation (described in Section 4 of main text)

                               ^
                               Σ                                       ^
                                                                       Σ                                ^
                                                                                                        Σ
                                 G                                       C                                E

             12.5
                                                   6

             10.0                                                                          6
                                                   5
       k 2
  ^ − Σ ||




              7.5                                  4
                                                                                           4
||Σk




                                                   3
              5.0

                                                   2                                       2
              2.5

                      2000   4000    6000   8000          2000    4000       6000   8000       2000   4000    6000   8000
                                                                       n

                                                       Method         mvHE     mvREHE




Figure S5: Estimation error of all three covariance matrices Σk (genetic, common environ-
mental, and unique environmental components) comparing mvHE and mvREHE estimators
with varying sample size n. Error is measured using the spectral norm of the difference
between estimated and true covariance matrices. Results demonstrate the superior perfor-
mance of mvREHE over mvHE across all components, particularly at smaller sample sizes.




                                                                 36
                                           ^
                                           Σ                                         ^
                                                                                     Σ                                         ^
                                                                                                                               Σ
                                             G                                         C                                         E
      across j ∈ F         0.4
                                                               0.2
                           0.3                                                                             0.6


                           0.2                                 0.1                                         0.4
 kj (βkj)

                kj (βkj)
                     *
     ^
R2*

               R2*




                           0.1                                                                             0.2
        Average




                                                               0.0
                           0.0
                                                                                                           0.0

                                 2000    4000    6000   8000             2000      4000    6000     8000            2000     4000        6000   8000
                                                                                     n

                                        Method      mvHE        mvREHE          Regression Method          matrix    lasso       ridge




Figure S6: Prediction performance of latent regression analysis for common environmental
and unique environmental components. Results show the average ratio of achieved R2 to
oracle R2 across all functional connections for different combinations of covariance estimation
methods (mvHE vs mvREHE) and regularization approaches (ridge, lasso, tensor regression)
with varying sample size n.

C.2                        Low-dimensional simulation
In this section, we perform simulations in the low-dimensional setting, where it is possible
to directly compare with the multivariate REML estimator. Due to its statistical efficiency,
the multivariate REML estimator is commonly considered a gold standard, despite being
computationally inefficient. We set the covariance matrices Σk to be scaled unstructured
correlation matrices with q = 5, 10, 20 traits. The scaling is defined such that the multi-
trait heritability matches that of the estimated model from the real data application. The
unstructured correlation matrices are fixed to be a uniform draw from the space of correlation
matrices, across all simulation replicates. We consider sample sizes ranging from 250 to 8000.
    In Figure S7a, we show the runtime for each of the estimators considered. First, we can see
that mvREHE has a similar runtime to mvHE — that is, imposing the positive semi-definite
constraint does not affect the runtime in these settings. We can also see that mvREHE is
nearly three orders of magnitude faster than the multivariate version of REML when q = 5
and nearly five orders of magnitude faster when q = 10. With large sample sizes and q = 10
or q = 20 with any sample size, the multivariate REML estimator cannot be computed in
reasonable time; thus, these results are not shown. We can see that increasing the number
of traits q does not have a large impact on the runtime of mvREHE, while for multivariate
REML the increase in runtime is substantial. Additionally, the multivariate REML estimator
is susceptible to convergence issues, resulting in a large number of replicates returning no
estimates for this estimator (over 90% of replicates failing in some settings with large sample
sizes; see Figure S2 in the Appendix). Finally, the mvREHE estimator is even faster than


                                                                            37
 a
                                         q=5                                             q = 10                                         q = 20
     log10(seconds)




                        4

                        2

                        0

                       −2
                             0   2000    4000    6000      8000 0              2000      4000      6000        8000 0         2000      4000      6000   8000

 b
                                        q=5                                               q = 10                                         q = 20
                      1.25                                       2.0
            G 2
       ^ − Σ ||




                      1.00                                       1.5                                                  3
                      0.75                                                                                            2
                                                                 1.0
         G




                      0.50
     ||Σ




                                                                 0.5                                                  1
                      0.25

                             0   2000   4000    6000    8000           0        2000     4000      6000        8000       0    2000      4000     6000   8000

 c
                                        q=5                                              q = 10                                          q = 20
                       0.8                                       0.9                                              1.2
     ||h − h2||2




                       0.7                                       0.8                                              1.0
                       0.6                                       0.7
                                                                                                                  0.8
                       0.5                                       0.6
       ^2




                       0.4                                       0.5                                              0.6
                                                                 0.4
                       0.3                                                                                        0.4
                             0   2000   4000    6000    8000           0        2000     4000      6000    8000           0    2000      4000     6000   8000
                                                                                           n

                                                  Multivariate             Univariate    Method           HE          REHE           REML




Figure S7: (a) Runtime, (b) spectral-norm error of Σ̂G , and (c) Euclidian-norm error of the
individual-trait heritability proportions h2 in the setting of unstructured, low-dimensional
Σk with varying q and n.




                                                                                    38
fitting separate univariate models for each trait using any of the univariate estimators, while
estimating the entire covariance matrix rather than the diagonal only.
     Given that the mvREHE estimator is the most computationally efficient, one may ask
if it compromises on estimation performance. In Figure S7b, we show the spectral error
of estimating the covariance matrix of the genetic component, with results for the other
components given in Figure S1. We can see that the PSD constraint in the mvREHE
estimator results in a large improvement over the mvHE estimator, nearly exactly matching
the estimation accuracy of the multivariate REML estimator in all cases where the REML
estimate could be computed.
     We also compare estimation performance of the individual-trait heritability proportions in
Figure S7c, as measured by the Euclidian-norm error on the vector of heritability proportion
of all traits. Since the heritability proportion depends only on the diagonal elements of the
covariance matrices, we compare against the univariate estimators as well. We again see
that mvREHE and multivariate REML have nearly identical performance, and that these
estimators greatly outperform their commonly-used univariate counterparts. Finally, we see
a large benefit from using a PSD constraint in mvREHE rather than simply truncating the
estimate in mvHE.
     In Figure S3, we present the results of a simulation akin to the one described in this
section, but with only the genetic and unique environment components, in order to facilitate
comparison with the optimized REML algorithm proposed by Zhou et al. (2014) which only
applies to two component models. In the two component setting, all methods have very
similar estimation performance. While the algorithm proposed by Zhou et al. (2014) is up to
two orders of magnitude faster than the lme4-based implementation of REML with q = 10,
it is still two orders of magnitude slower than mvREHE when q = 10 and four orders of
magnitude slower than mvREHE when q = 20.




                                              39
                               q = 5 (Σ
                                      ^ )
                                        G                                     q = 5 (Σ
                                                                                     ^ )
                                                                                       C                                    q = 5 (Σ
                                                                                                                                   ^ )
                                                                                                                                     E

             1.25

             1.00                                           0.6                                            0.6

             0.75                                           0.4                                            0.4
             0.50
                                                            0.2                                            0.2
             0.25


                               q = 10 (Σ
                                       ^ )
                                         G                                   q = 10 (Σ
                                                                                     ^ )
                                                                                       C                                    q = 10 (Σ
                                                                                                                                    ^ )
                                                                                                                                      E

              2.0                                          1.25

                                                           1.00                                           1.00
       k 2




              1.5
  ^ − Σ ||




                                                           0.75                                           0.75
              1.0
   k




                                                           0.50                                           0.50
||Σ




              0.5                                          0.25                                           0.25


                               q = 20 (Σ
                                       ^ )
                                         G                                   q = 20 (Σ
                                                                                     ^ )
                                                                                       C                                    q = 20 (Σ
                                                                                                                                    ^ )
                                                                                                                                      E

                                                            2.0
                                                                                                           1.5
               3                                            1.5

               2                                                                                           1.0
                                                            1.0

               1                                            0.5                                            0.5


                    0   2000     4000        6000   8000          0   2000        4000      6000   8000          0   2000     4000        6000   8000
                                                                                   n

                                                       Method          mvHE              mvREHE     mvREML




Figure S1: Estimation error of all three covariance matrices Σk in the setting of low-
dimensional Σk with varying sample size n.




                                                                             40
                                                           q=5                                         q = 10
          Proportion of convergence
             failures for mvREML




                                      0.75



                                      0.50



                                      0.25



                                      0.00
                                             250   500   1000   2000   4000   8000       250   500   1000   2000   4000   8000
                                                                                     n


Figure S2: Proportion of simulation replicates in low-dimensional simulation setting in which
the multivariate REML estimator fails to converge. Note that no results are reported for
the settings with q = 10 and n = 4000 and 8000, as REML estimation is computationally
prohibitive in these cases.




                                                                              41
 a
                                        q=5                                                  q = 10                                     q = 20
     log10(seconds)




                       2

                       0

                      −2
                            0   2000    4000        6000       8000 0            2000        4000     6000    8000 0           2000     4000      6000   8000

 b
                                       q=5                                                   q = 10                                      q = 20
                      0.5                                           0.8
            G 2




                      0.4
       ^ − Σ ||




                                                                    0.6                                             1.2
                      0.3
                                                                    0.4                                             0.8
         G




                      0.2
     ||Σ




                                                                    0.2                                             0.4
                      0.1
                            0   2000   4000      6000        8000         0      2000        4000     6000   8000         0      2000    4000     6000   8000

 c
                                       q=5                                                   q = 10                                      q = 20
                      0.6                                           0.7
     ||h − h2||2




                      0.5                                           0.6                                             0.8
                      0.4                                           0.5
                                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                    0.4
       ^2




                      0.3
                                                                    0.3                                             0.4
                      0.2
                            0   2000   4000      6000        8000         0      2000        4000     6000   8000         0      2000    4000     6000   8000
                                                                                               n

                                              Multivariate          Univariate     Method             HE     REHE             REML      GEMMA




Figure S3: (a) Runtime, (b) spectral-norm error of Σ̂G , and (c) Euclidian-norm error of the
individual-trait heritability proportions h2 in the setting of unstructured, low-dimensional
Σk with varying q and n with only the genetic and unique environmental components (two
component model). GEMMA is the optimized algorithm for computing the multivariate
REML estimator, proposed by Zhou et al. (2014).




                                                                                        42
D      Extension to function-valued traits
Often times, neuroimaging traits can be measured along a continuum, though only discrete
measurements are obtained. Here, we show how the proposed mvREHE estimator can be
easily combined with ideas from functional data analysis (Yao et al. 2005) to incorporate
smoothness into the covariance estimation step, similar to Risk et al. (2021).
    Consider the following model for the noiseless data of the ith subject:

                                      yi (t) = gi (t) + ci (t) + ei (t)

for t ∈ [0, 1], where gi , ci , and ei are mean-zero Gaussian processes with smooth covariance
functions CG , CC , and CE respectively. Suppose we observe noisy versions of yi at q discrete
points t1 , . . . , tq , denoted as the vector yi , where

                         [yi ]j = yi (tj ) + δij = gi (tj ) + ci (tj ) + ei (tj ) + δij     (20)

for j = 1, . . . , q, where δij ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) are i.i.d. Then,
                                              d
                                          yi = gi + ci + ei + δ i                           (21)

where gi ∼ N (0, ΣG ), ci ∼ N (0, ΣC ), ei ∼ N (0, ΣE ), and δ i ∼ N (0, σ 2 Iq ), and [Σk ]j,l =
Ck (tj , tl ) for k ∈ {G, C, E}.
    Let Y, G, C, E, and ∆ be matrices with rows yi , gi , ci , ei , and δ i , respectively. As in
the observed data model in equation (6), we assume that G ∼ MN (0n×q , Kn , ΣG ), C ∼
MN (0n×q , Hn , ΣC ), E ∼ MN (0n×q , In , ΣE ), and ∆ ∼ MN (0n×q , In , σ 2 Iq ). Without any
additional assumptions, with D0 = In , it is not possible to identify E and ∆, since they both
have the same row-covariance, therefore E +∆ also follows a matrix-normal distribution with
the same row-covariance. However, in the functional data setting described, it is reasonable
to assume Ck are smooth covariance functions, thus it is possible to estimate them even in
the presence of noise. Specifically, we propose to fit model (6), but, similar to (Risk et al.
2021; Yao et al. 2005), apply a 2D local polynomial smoother to the estimates Σ̂k with the
diagonal removed, to obtain estimates of Ck .

D.1      Simulation results
In this section, we simulate data from the model in equation (20) with covariance functions
defined by
                                               50
                                               X
                       CG (s, t) = CE (s, t) =    k −2α cos(kπs) cos(kπt).
                                                     k=1

We consider α = 1 and α = 2, where the covariance function with α = 2 is smoother than
that with α = 1. We set the variance of the observational noise σ 2 = 1. We sample the
function at q = 100 timepoints equally spaced between 0 and 1.
   To estimate the covariance functions, we define the mvHE and mvREHE estimates as

                                                      43
                                                α = 1 (Σ
                                                       ^ )
                                                         G                                    α = 1 (Σ
                                                                                                     ^ )
                                                                                                       C                                   α = 1 (Σ
                                                                                                                                                  ^ )
                                                                                                                                                    E

                                                                           0.00016
                                                                                                                         0.00020

                                2e−04                                      0.00012                                       0.00015
     (s, t) − Ck(s, t))2dsdt



                                                                           0.00008                                       0.00010
                                1e−04
                                                                           0.00004                                       0.00005



                                                α = 2 (Σ
                                                       ^ )
                                                         G                                    α = 2 (Σ
                                                                                                     ^ )
                                                                                                       C                                   α = 2 (Σ
                                                                                                                                                  ^ )
                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                         0.00020
                               0.00020
⌡⌡ k




                                                                                                                         0.00015
⌠⌠(C
   ^




                                                                            1e−04
                               0.00015
                                                                                                                         0.00010
                               0.00010
                                                                            5e−05
                                                                                                                         0.00005
                               0.00005

                                         2000    4000        6000   8000               2000    4000        6000   8000              2000    4000        6000   8000
                                                                                                  n

                                                        Method         mvHE          mvREHE        mvHE−smoothed             mvREHE−smoothed




Figure S4: Estimation error with two covariance functions with different degrees of smooth-
ness, where larger α means smoother. The number of discrete observations along the function
is q = 100 with n varying.

piecewise-constant functions given by the elements of the estimated Σ̂k . We compare these
to smoothed versions of these estimators, as described in Section D. To get smooth estimates
Ĉk , we apply a local linear smoother to the estimated Σ̂k after removing the diagonal ele-
ments, with an Epanechnikov kernel and bandwidth chosen by generalized cross-validation.
     In Figure S4, we show the integrated squared error of estimating Ck . We see that with low
sample sizes, smoothing helps in estimation of the covariance functions for all components,
and mvREHE improves over mvHE for both the smoothed and unsmoothed versions. For
estimation of CE , smoothing helps even with large sample sizes, since it is able to recover
the smooth covariance function which does not contain the observational noise along the
diagonal term, as described in Section D. Note that the unsmoothed estimates of CE are
not consistent due to the lack of identifiability without smoothness. This highlights the
versatility of the proposed framework and its ability to be combined with other covariance
estimation approaches to incorporate additional information about the data.




                                                                                         44
