                                          Bayesian brain mapping: a population-informed framework for
                                           personalized functional network topography and connectivity
                                          Nohelia Da Silva Sanchez*1 , Diego Derman, PhD*1 , Saige Rutherford, PhD1 , Damon D.
                                             Pham1 , Ellyn R. Butler, MS2 , Mary Beth Nebel3 , and Amanda F. Mejia, PhD1
                                                                 1
                                                               Department of Statistics, Indiana University
                                                           2
                                                            Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
                                            3
                                              Center for Neurodevelopmental and Imaging Research, Kennedy Krieger Institute
arXiv:2602.01551v2 [stat.AP] 4 May 2026




                                          *Contributed equally



                                          Co-author e-mail addresses: ellynbutler2027@u.northwestern.edu, nebel@kennedykrieger.org,
                                          afmejia@iu.edu, dderman@iu.edu, ndasilv@iu.edu



                                          ORCIDs: E.R.B. (0000-0001-6316-6444), A.F.M. (0000-0002-4312-8974), D.D. (0000-0002-6895-
                                          9248)



                                          Corresponding author: Diego Derman
                                          E-mail: dderman@iu.edu




                                                                                     1
                                         Abstract

   The spatial topography of functional brain organization is increasingly recognized to play
an important role in cognition and disease. Accounting for individual differences in func-
tional topography is also crucial for accurately distinguishing spatial and temporal aspects
of functional brain connectivity. Yet, accurate estimation of personalized functional brain
networks from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) without extensive scanning
remains challenging due to high noise levels. Here, we describe Bayesian Brain Mapping
(BBM), a technique for personalized functional topography and connectivity informed by
population information. BBM relies on population-derived priors on both spatial topography
of networks and between-network functional connectivity to guide subject-level estimation
and combat noise. These priors are based on existing spatial templates, such as parcella-
tions or continuous network maps, providing correspondence to those templates. Yet BBM
is highly flexible, avoiding strong spatial or temporal constraints and allowing for overlap
between networks and heterogeneous patterns of engagement. BBM is designed for single-
subject analysis, making it computationally efficient and translatable to clinical settings.
Here, we describe the BBM model and illustrate the use of the BayesBrainMap R pack-
age to construct population-derived priors, fit the model, and perform inference to identify
engagements. A demo is provided in an accompanying Github repo. We also share priors
derived from the Human Connectome Project and provide code to support the construction
of priors from different data sources, lowering the barrier to adoption of BBM for studies of
individual brain organization.




                                             2
1    Introduction

The functional organization of the brain is highly individualized, both in terms of the spatial

configuration (Gordon et al., 2017a; Braga and Buckner, 2017; Cui et al., 2020) and temporal

dynamics (Finn et al., 2015) of functional brain networks. Individual features of functional

network topography have been shown to be predictive of a range of individual characteristics

and conditions including cognition, disease severity, psychopathology, socio-economic status, and

neurodevelopment (Bijsterbosch et al., 2018; Kong et al., 2019; Bijsterbosch et al., 2019; Cui

et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Keller et al., 2023; Lynch et al., 2024; Butler et al., 2025; Pang

et al., 2026; Herzberg et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024). Thus, functional network topography is

a potentially valuable source of information derived from neuroimaging data for the assessment

of disease progression and evaluating the mechanisms underlying treatment efficacy.

Extracting functional topography accurately at the individual level has historically relied on

collecting hours of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) from each par-

ticipant (Braga and Buckner, 2017; Gordon et al., 2017b; Xue et al., 2021). These precision

neuroimaging studies have been crucial in revealing the existence, nature, and extent of individ-

ual differences in functional topography. However, translational goals, including using functional

topography and connectivity features as biomarkers and for personalized treatment, depend on

extracting these features accurately from moderate amounts of data feasible to collect in clinical

settings.

Another motivation for extracting individualized functional topography from standard-duration

scans is its relevance to measurement of FC, i.e. the temporal synchrony between regions of the

brain. The use of group parcellations or network maps misaligned to the individual’s functional

topography can lead to biased FC estimates due to mixing of signals from distinct functional

areas (Smith et al., 2011; Bijsterbosch et al., 2018, 2019; Butler et al., 2026). Thus, true

differences in functional topography can be misinterpreted as differences in FC. A potential

ramification is that real relationships between behavioral or phenotypic measures and functional

topography may be incorrectly attributed to FC. If prediction is the main objective, such mixing

of underlying features may not be highly consequential. But if we aim to understand the brain

mechanisms behind certain behaviors or disease states, rather than simply predict them, it is


                                                3
crucial to disentangle differences in spatial topography from differences in temporal engagement

and connectivity (Harrison et al., 2020).

To extract individualized or “personalized” functional networks (PFNs) from typical duration

subject-level fMRI data, hierarchical Bayesian models have proven an effective approach. These

models reduce noise by combining information from multiple subjects, while respecting indi-

vidual differences and ensuring correspondence between individuals. Hierarchical models have

been successfully applied in the context of parcellation (Kong et al., 2019, 2021), probabilistic

functional modes (PROFUMO) (Harrison et al., 2015; Farahibozorg et al., 2021), and indepen-

dent component analysis (ICA) (Guo and Tang, 2013; Mejia et al., 2020). Importantly, these

methods have been shown to perform well using a modest amount of data per individual, po-

tentially avoiding the need to collect prolonged or repeated fMRI sessions in individuals. This

makes them highly attractive in contexts where extensive subject-level scanning is not feasible,

including clinical settings where it presents a financial and physical burden for patients.

In addition to the importance of accounting for individual differences in functional topography,

there is growing evidence for the existence and relevance of overlapping functional architecture

among brain systems or networks (Power et al., 2013; Gratton et al., 2018; Faskowitz et al., 2020;

Hermosillo et al., 2024). This favors “soft” parcellations allowing for overlap between functional

networks over traditional “hard” parcellations (Li et al., 2018; Dadi et al., 2020; Bijsterbosch

et al., 2023). Examples of soft parcellation approaches include spatial ICA (Beckmann and

Smith, 2004), temporal ICA (Smith et al., 2012), PROFUMO (Harrison et al., 2015), non-

negative matrix factorization (Li et al., 2017), gradients (Margulies et al., 2016), and dictionaries

of functional modes (Dadi et al., 2020). All of these methods use assumptions or constraints to

make estimation feasible, though they differ in the specific choice of constraint. For instance,

spatial ICA encourages statistical independence between network maps, leading to relatively

little overlap between networks. PROFUMO and temporal ICA allow for greater spatial overlap

but encourage temporal independence between networks, resulting in low FC between networks

(Pervaiz et al., 2020). Relaxing these constraints, while continuing to provide sufficient model

guidance for estimation accuracy and alignment of features across individuals, may permit both

the temporal and spatial features of functional brain organization to be more fully expressed.



                                                 4
Here, we present Bayesian Brain Mapping (BBM), a pragmatic and flexible hierarchical Bayesian

technique for producing PFNs without strong constraints on the spatial or temporal structure

of the networks. BBM begins with a template, which can be either a group parcellation or a set

of continuous network maps. That template is used as the basis for population-derived priors

on spatial topography and FC, which are then used to inform subject-level estimation of those

same features. BBM is a generalization of template ICA (Mejia et al., 2020), which uses group

ICA maps as the template, but BBM allows for parcellations, ICA maps, PROFUMO modes,

and other types of network maps as the template.

In this work, we describe BBM, illustrate its use, and provide resources to facilitate its adoption.

We have three primary goals. First, we demonstrate the use of the BayesBrainMap R package,

which includes functions for establishing population-derived priors and for fitting subject-level

models to estimate individual functional topography and connectivity. Second, we illustrate

the flexibility of BBM to work with various choices of template, including parcellations and

continuous network maps, and how the priors relax the more constrained templates. Finally,

we share high-quality priors derived from the Human Connectome Project (HCP) (Van Essen

et al., 2013) using a variety of templates, along with instructions and code to replicate those

priors. The priors can be directly adopted to apply BBM to studies of healthy young adults, or

our pipeline can be adapted to produce custom priors based on other templates or populations.

A comprehensive demo available on Github accompanies this manuscript and provides further

details, examples, and visualizations.



2    Methods

Figure 1 illustrates the BBM framework. First, the selected template is used to construct

population-derived priors for the functional topography of and FC between networks. The

network priors encode inherent population variability in the boundaries, configuration, and

overlap of networks, effectively relaxing any strong constraints of the template. Second, the priors

are used to guide and inform estimation in a subject-level Bayesian model to obtain posterior

estimates of individual functional topography and FC, as well as measures of uncertainty that

can be used for inference. Note that there is no need to fit a large multi-subject hierarchical


                                                 5
Figure 1: Overview of Bayesian Brain Mapping. The two main steps are (1) prior
estimation and (2) model fitting, both implemented in the BayesBrainMap R package.


model. The ability to analyze data from a single subject at a time makes BBM highly pragmatic,

computationally efficient, parallelizable, and feasible in clinical settings.

The BBM population-derived priors reduce noise while retaining signal, resulting in more reli-

able and accurate personalized functional network maps and the FC between them (Mejia et al.,

2020, 2023, 2025). An important feature of the functional topography priors is that the popula-

tion variance of each network varies across the brain, generally showing greater inter-individual

differences in regions of high engagement, and greater similarity across subjects in background

regions where engagement is low (Figure 1). This allows individual differences to be expressed

where they exist, while reducing noise in background regions through shrinkage. Due to the

continuous, whole-brain nature of BBM network maps, noise reduction in background regions

of one network also indirectly contributes to estimation of signal in the same area of the brain

in other networks.

BBM includes an optional population-derived prior on the FC between networks to encode pop-

ulation trends and variability in FC, which shrinks the subject-level FC toward the population

mean to alleviate sampling error and stabilize within-subject fluctuations. It is well-established

that Bayesian shrinkage is beneficial for reliable FC estimation (Ledoit and Wolf, 2004; Su et al.,

2009; Chen et al., 2010; Varoquaux et al., 2010; Shou et al., 2014; Mejia et al., 2015; Dai et al.,

2017; Mejia et al., 2018; Rahim et al., 2019; Pervaiz et al., 2020; Honnorat and Habes, 2022).



                                                  6
However, the inverse-Wishart distribution, a common choice of parametric prior for FC due

to its conjugacy with the multivariate Normal distribution (Honnorat et al., 2019; Harrison

et al., 2020; Mejia et al., 2025), has limited ability to capture population variance patterns. We

recently developed a novel informative prior for correlation matrices based on Cholesky factoriza-

tion, which accurately captures population variance in FC and outperforms the inverse-Wishart

for FC estimation (Mejia et al., 2025).

In this section, we describe and illustrate the two main steps in BBM: prior estimation and

model fitting. We first present the Bayesian model. We then describe how we derive the

priors, illustrating the process using HCP data. Our HCP-derived priors are freely available for

download, and we share our code so it can be adapted to other contexts. Finally, we illustrate

the application of BBM to several individuals from the HCP. All of the techniques described

here are implemented in the BayesBrainMap R package, and code for the analyses presented are

available via Github (https://github.com/statMINDlab/BBM-demo).



2.1   Hierarchical Bayesian model


For a given subject, let ytv be the preprocessed BOLD fMRI time series at location v and time

point t. The BBM model assumes the BOLD time series can be linearly deconstructed into

contributions from a set of networks. The model is similar to ICA and other source separation

models, but without strong temporal or spatial constraints.

                              Q
                              X
                      ytv =         atq sqv + etv = a⊤
                                                     t sv + etv ,   etv ∼ N (0, τv2 )          (1)
                              q=1

                      sqv = s0qv + δqv ,                  2
                                             δqv ∼ N (0, σqv )                                 (2)

                       at ∼ N (0, G),        G ∼ p(G)                                          (3)



At level (1) of the model, sqv is the spatial engagement of network q at location v, and atq is the

temporal activation of network q at time t. The vectors at and sv combine those values across

all Q networks. The scale of the residual white noise etv is allowed to vary spatially. In ICA

and other blind source separation analyses of fMRI data, it is common to include additional



                                                     7
components to capture structured noise from head motion and other sources. In BBM, these are

not included in the model but are automatically estimated and removed beforehand, as described

in Mejia et al. (2020). In addition, we recommend decomposition-based denoising, such as ICA-

FIX (Griffanti et al., 2014) or ICA-AROMA (Pruim et al., 2015), to reduce structured noise

prior to model fitting as this has been shown to improve performance across methods (Harrison

et al., 2020).

Level (2) of the model incorporates the population-derived prior on the spatial topography in

sqv , where the population mean s0qv and variance σqv
                                                   2 are considered known, and the deviation


terms δqv represent individual differences (Mejia et al., 2020). Spatial dependencies in δqv can be

modeled via a multivariate spatial prior for additional accuracy and power, though at a higher

computational cost (Mejia et al., 2023).

Level (3) of the model incorporates a population-derived prior on the FC between networks and

is optional. This is accomplished by assuming a multivariate Normal prior on at with mean

zero and covariance G, and assuming a population-derived hyperprior on G (Mejia et al., 2025).

Note that we constrain each column of the mixing matrix to unit variance (for identifiability, as

often required in blind source separation), so Cov(at ) ≡ Cor(at ). Hence, the covariance of at

is equal to the Pearson correlation between the time courses of each network and represents the

between-network FC. We provide two choices for the FC prior: the conjugate inverse-Wishart

distribution, which is also used in PROFUMO (Harrison et al., 2020), or a novel Cholesky prior

developed for this model to more accurately encode population variance patterns (Mejia et al.,

2025). The conjugate prior allows for faster computation, while the Cholesky prior improves

performance but is more computationally demanding, since it requires sampling from the prior.

Even with the Cholesky prior, model fitting is quite feasible compared with large hierarchical

models.



2.2    Population-derived priors


Here, we describe the construction of population-derived priors using training data from the

HCP and illustrate the process via the BayesBrainMap R package. All steps are detailed in

a demo available at https://github.com/statMINDlab/BBM-demo. The HCP-derived priors


                                                8
    GSR                              Network Maps                            Parcellations
                     GICA 15     GICA 25 GICA 50 PROFUMO 12                 Yeo 17 MSC 17
    With GSR            ✓           ✓        ✓       ✓                        ✓        ✓
    Without GSR         ✓           ✓        ✓       ✓                        ✓        ✓

   Table 1: Templates used for construction of HCP-derived priors available through OSF.


themselves are available through Open Science Framework (OSF) as described in the Github repo

README. These priors can be directly utilized for application of BBM to analyze healthy young

adults. While we do not advise applying HCP-derived priors directly to study individuals from

clearly distinct populations, such as children, the elderly, or individuals with known neurological

conditions, our workflow can be replicated using the process and scripts provided to produce

priors for other populations.

We consider several different choices of template, including parcellations and continuous network

maps (Table 1). For each template, we build priors with and without global signal regression

(GSR), since the decision to use GSR remains the subject of debate. As templates, we use the

17-network Yeo parcellation (Yeo et al., 2011), the Midnight Scan Club (MSC) group parcella-

tion (Gordon et al., 2017b), HCP-derived group ICA maps with 15 to 50 components (Smith

et al., 2013), and group-level PROFUMO modes (Harrison et al., 2020). Note that whether

the template is a hard parcellation or continuous, the BBM priors and individual functional

topography maps are always continuous.

We first select a high-quality/low-motion, balanced training sample to ensure reliable and rep-

resentative priors. Starting from the full HCP sample of N = 1206 subjects, we apply several

filters. First, we exclude subjects with insufficient scan duration (< 10 min) after dropping

the first 15 volumes and excluding volumes with excessive head motion, based on a lagged and

filtered version of framewise displacement (FD) appropriate for multiband data (Power et al.,

2019; Pham et al., 2023) with a threshold of 0.5mm. Second, we exclude any remaining related

subjects, retaining the first eligible subject per family after motion and scan-duration filtering.

Finally, we balance sex within each age group by randomly downsampling the overrepresented

sex so that males and females are equally represented within each age bin. After applying all

filters, our final sample contains 348 subjects. Both runs from the first visit were then used to

train the population-derived priors. Note that priors can also be trained using a single run per


                                                9
subject, in which case each run is split down the middle to produce two pseudo runs.

We now briefly describe the process of deriving the priors, all steps of which are implemented in

the BayesBrainMap function estimate_prior(). For more details, see the Github demo that

accompanies this manuscript. For each training subject and session, dual regression (Beckmann

et al., 2009) is used with the chosen template to produce a noisy set of time courses and spatial

maps.1 Those test-retest spatial engagement maps and time courses are then used to estimate

the parameters for the topography and FC priors in the BBM model, as we now describe.

Estimation of the topography prior in level (2) of the model is straightforward. Consider a

single location v and network q, we aim to estimate the population mean s0qv and the population
          2 . Dropping the q and v subscripts momentarily, let x
variance σqv                                                    ij be the dual regression

estimate of spatial engagement for training subject i at session j. The prior mean s0 is simply
                                                      ¯. The prior variance σ 2 is estimated based
estimated as the mean over all subjects and sessions, x̄

on a simple measurement error model:


                                                                ind
                                       xij = zi + eij ,      eij ∼ (0, σe2 )
                                            ind
                                         zi ∼ (µ, σ 2 ),


where zi represent the true, noise-free spatial engagement, and the residuals eij are assumed

independent of zi . Our intended prior variance is the between-subject variance of the underlying

engagements, σ 2 , while σe2 represents noise levels in the dual regression maps. The variance terms

in this model can be estimated using standard variance decomposition techniques or iterative

estimation procedures for linear mixed effects models.

Estimation of the FC prior in level (3) of the BBM model is based on the Q × Q Pearson

correlation matrices of the dual regression network time series. As described above, two options

for the prior are available: the inverse-Wishart, which is conjugate but has limited flexibility

to capture population variance patterns, and a novel informative prior for correlation matrices
   1
    For templates that are parcellations, we use a modified version of dual regression: note that if network maps
were binary and non-overlapping, then the first step of dual regression would produce the mean time series within
each parcel as the corresponding time series. If group parcels are misaligned to an individual, this will result in
mixing signals from multiple networks. To allow for some misalignment between the subject-specific networks
and the parcels, we simply compute the median rather than the mean within each parcel. The second step of
dual regression then proceeds as usual, as a multiple linear regression modeling the fMRI time series at each
location as a function of the network time series to produce a map of engagement for each network.


                                                        10
based on Cholesky factorizations, which we recently developed. See Mejia et al. (2025) for details

of the estimation procedure for both priors.

A large training sample from a publicly available resource like the HCP is ideal for prior esti-

mation, as long as the focal subject or study to be analyzed comes from a similar population.

However, it is sometimes desirable to build a customized prior for the specific population or

context of a given study. In that case, it is possible to use a holdout set which has been done

successfully in previous studies (Gaddis et al., 2022; Derman et al., 2025). This holdout set

should be large enough to accurately estimate prior parameters, ideally 100 or more, or at least

several dozen. It is also possible to use the same subjects for prior estimation and subsequent

subject-level analysis (Butler et al., 2025), an approach known as empirical Bayes (EB). While

EB comes with a risk of overfitting, it also allows for using all of the available data for training,

generally resulting in more accurate priors, which may be considered worth the tradeoff.

It is vital to visually inspect the prior mean and variance maps to assess the level of noise

present. Besides a large training sample, avoiding over-processing of the training data can also

reduce noise levels in the priors. Strategies to avoid over-processing include using lenient or data-

driven volume censoring, parsimonious nuisance regression/denoising, and high-pass instead of

band-pass filtering (Pham et al., 2023; Bright et al., 2017; Tong et al., 2019).



2.3   Fitting the single-subject model


Once the priors have been estimated, the BBM model can be fit to one or more fMRI sessions

from a single individual to estimate functional brain topography and FC. Model fitting is im-

plemented in the BayesBrainMap function fit_BBM() through an iterative procedure based on

expectation-maximization (Mejia et al., 2020, 2023) or variational Bayes (Mejia et al., 2025),

depending on the specific model. This function produces point estimates (i.e., posterior means)

of the subject-specific spatial maps and FC matrices, as well as measures of uncertainty (i.e.,

posterior variances or samples) to facilitate inference.

Finally, areas of significant engagement for each network are identified using posterior inference

with the function id_engagements(), which by default applies false discovery rate (FDR) mul-

tiple comparisons correction. Because the BBM framework has relatively high power to detect

                                                 11
non-zero engagements, we can specify a minimum effect size of interest for inference. Since the

spatial maps are in arbitrary units, we draw inspiration from a common method for threshold-

ing group ICA maps, where values over z standard deviations above the mean across space are

commonly displayed, while values below this are considered negligible and suppressed. Follow-

ing this logic, we set a minimum effect size for inference as the prior mean value corresponding

to z standard deviations above the mean. The id_engagements() function allows the user to

specify z, or to provide multiple values for z to produce a nested set of significant engagements

of different strengths (illustrated in Figure 5).

In the Github demo that accompanies this manuscript, we illustrate the use of the fit_BBM()

and id_engagements() functions to analyze several individual participants from the HCP.



3     Results

3.1   Priors relax spatial constraints of templates and allow network overlap


Prior means on the spatial network topography for several networks from the Yeo17 template are

shown in Figure 2. As a hard parcellation, the template is constrained to have no overlap between

networks. By contrast, the prior reflects the engagement of the network in the training sample,

with no constraint to encourage or enforce spatial independence. This additional flexibility allows

the template networks to extend beyond their original boundaries, suggesting the presence of

regions that engage in multiple networks and/or individual differences in network boundaries.

Arrows indicate areas that differ markedly between the template parcels and the prior mean

maps. For instance, in the Default A network, bilateral, roughly symmetric temporal lobe

engagement is seen in the prior, whereas the template parcel only includes right-hemisphere

temporal lobe engagement. Another noteworthy example is engagement of Broca’s area and

other areas commonly associated with language in the temporal parietal network, while the cor-

responding parcel is constrained to the temporal lobe. The prior mean for this network is similar

to patterns often seen in networks characterized by strong engagement in the superior tempo-

ral gyrus and the temporal parietal junction when using ICA, PROFUMO, or other network

estimation methods that allow for overlap between networks.


                                                    12
                        Template                             Prior Mean
        ContA
       DefaultA
       DorsAttnA
       SomMotA
       TempPar
       VisCent




Figure 2: HCP-derived spatial topography priors for Yeo17 template. Six exemplar
networks are shown. While the parcels are constrained to have no overlap, the prior mean maps
for each network show expansion beyond the parcel boundaries, indicating overlapping network
engagement.




                                             13
The pairwise spatial overlap between networks for different templates and their corresponding

priors is shown in Appendix Figure S.1. Overlap is quantified using the Dice coefficient. For

continuous network templates and prior means, we first threshold the maps at a z-score of ±2

(where the z-score is based on the mean and standard deviation of the prior mean map across

all vertices), following a common practice for thresholding group ICA maps to isolate areas of

engagement. The parcellation templates, by definition, have zero overlap between networks,

yet their corresponding priors exhibit substantial overlap between certain networks. Network

maps based on PROFUMO exhibit the most overlap, reflecting a key feature of that method,

and the degree of overlap is similar in the template and the prior. To a slightly lesser degree,

the GICA template and prior also exhibit overlap. This illustrates that spatial independence in

ICA does not prohibit spatial overlap, as is sometimes assumed.2 Still, the GICA prior mean

maps exhibit somewhat stronger overlap than the GICA templates, suggesting a relaxation of

the spatial constraints in the ICA model.



3.2    Different templates produce similar network topography priors


Spatial topography priors for a default mode network component from various templates are

shown in Figure 3. Similar features are seen across the different priors, even though the templates

are based on distinct model assumptions. The prior variance maps show that individual variation

in engagement is greatest in areas of high average engagement, reflecting differences in the

configuration, size, and distribution of networks across individuals. The low prior variance

in background areas, where true population variability is low, will result in a high degree of

regularization in these areas for the corresponding networks. Higher prior variance in areas of

engagement, by contrast, will allow for individual features to be expressed. Furthermore, due

to the additive nature of the decomposition, noise reduction in background areas of certain

networks will indirectly improve estimation of engagement in other networks corresponding to

the same physical location.
   2
    On the contrary, non-overlap implies anti-correlation, so non-correlated spatial maps will tend do exhibit
overlap. Consider this from a probability perspective: disjoint events are never independent, since the occurrence
of one event precludes occurrence of the other.




                                                       14
     PROFUMO       Template                 Prior Mean                 Prior SD
      (Q = 12)
     GICA15
     (Q = 15)
     (Q = 17)
      Yeo17
     (Q = 17)
      MSC
     GICA25
     (Q = 25)




Figure 3: HCP-derived spatial topography priors for a default mode network com-
ponent from various templates. Templates include two parcellations (Yeo17 and MSC) and
two types of network maps (ICA and PROFUMO) and are ordered from lowest to highest reso-
lution (number of networks). The specific networks displayed are PROFUMO mode 8, GICA15
component 2, Yeo17 Default A, MSC Default, and GICA25 IC 2. Template maps are displayed
on an arbitrary scale, while the scale of the priors is inversely proportional to the template
resolution Q, given the additive nature of the BBM decomposition.




                                             15
                   Population                  Cholesky                Inverse-Wishart
    Mean
    SD




Figure 4: Example of the BBM functional connectivity (FC) prior. Results shown
here correspond to the Yeo17 template; results for other templates are displayed in Appendix
Figure S.2. The first column shows the element-wise empirical mean and standard deviation
(SD) within the training set, which is used to establish the priors. The second and third columns
show the element-wise mean and SD based on the Cholesky and the inverse-Wishart priors. The
population mean is captured by both priors. However, the inverse-Wishart prior fails to capture
the element-wise population variance patterns, given that distribution’s limited flexibility. The
Cholesky prior, which we developed for BBM, accurately captures the element-wise population
variance patterns.




                                               16
3.2.1    BBM FC prior accurately captures population variance patterns


The FC priors in BBM are illustrated in Figure 4 for the Yeo17 template and in Appendix

Figure S.2 for other templates. The element-wise empirical mean and standard deviation within

the training set, representing population tendencies and variability, are shown in the first col-

umn. The second two columns show the corresponding values based on the two choices of FC

prior in BBM: the permuted Cholesky prior described in Mejia et al. (2025) and the conjugate

inverse-Wishart (IW), which is also used in PROFUMO (Harrison et al., 2020). While both

priors capture the population mean, only the Cholesky prior accurately captures the population

variance. This is because the IW distribution for covariance matrices includes a single scalar

parameter that moderates the variance across the matrix, so that the element-wise variance is

monotonically related to the element-wise mean. In BBM, this parameter is chosen to minimize

the difference between the population and prior element-wise variance, but with a constraint

that the prior variance should not be less than the population variance anywhere. This avoids

an overly informative prior, which would result in too much shrinkage towards the group and loss

of relevant individual information. Due to this limitation of the inverse-Wishart distribution,

the IW FC prior tends to have much higher variance for many FC edges compared with the

population, resulting in unnecessarily weak shrinkage. The Cholesky prior, by contrast, is more

informative while not being overly informative. This theoretically maximizes accuracy of FC

estimates, and has indeed been shown to produce more reliable and individualized estimates of

between-network FC (Mejia et al., 2025). Improved estimation of the temporal component of

the BBM model may also have downstream benefits for estimation of spatial topography, since

the temporal and spatial components are estimated iteratively.



3.3     Illustration of BBM for personalized network topography and inference


Figure 5 shows example personalized functional network topography maps produced by applying

BBM to analyze data from one HCP subject, using the population-derived priors based on the

Yeo17 template. A single network is shown corresponding to the Default A parcel. The posterior

mean provides an estimate of engagement in the network at every vertex, while the posterior

standard deviation represents uncertainty around that estimate. Binary maps of statistically


                                               17
                             Prior Mean                   Prior SD




      Posterior Mean              Posterior SD               Engagements




Figure 5: Example individual BBM spatial engagement maps. A single HCP subject
was analyzed using BBM with population-derived priors based on the Yeo17 template. The BBM
posterior mean and standard deviation for a network corresponding to the Yeo17 DefaultA parcel
are shown, along with areas of statistically significant engagement. Significance is based on the
Bayesian equivalent of a hypothesis test with α = 0.05 and Bonferroni correction within each
network. A range of effect size thresholds are specified based on σ, the standard deviation of the
prior mean map. This is analogous to the common practice of thresholding group ICA maps at
a certain number of standard deviations from the mean to isolate the main areas of engagement.




                                                 18
significant engagement are produced based on the posterior mean and standard deviation, using

the Bayesian equivalent of a hypothesis test. A range of “null hypotheses” based on different

minimum effect sizes of interest are tested against, resulting in nested sets of significantly engaged

vertices. The ability to specify a minimum effect size gives the researcher flexibility to focus

on locations that exhibit intense network engagement, or to consider all vertices that exhibit

non-zero engagement. The researcher can also consider a range of minimum effect sizes, as we

have done here, to distinguish between levels of engagement.



3.4   Computational demands of BBM


Prior estimation based on the templates listed in Table 1 was completed for the HCP population

of 348 subjects in an average of 155 minutes per template, with peak memory usage of 126 GB.

All calculations were performed using 48 concurrent threads on an Intel Xeon W 2.7 GHz

processor running macOS Tahoe 26.2. The number of subjects in the sample, the number of

volumes in each scan, and the number of vertices will directly affect the computational demands

of estimate_prior().

It is worth noting that this calculation needs to be performed only once for each training dataset.

For representative populations, priors can ideally be shared through a repository (OSF in the

present study), thereby eliminating the need for repeated prior estimations and allowing users

to proceed directly to the fit_BBM() function, which fits the model to individual data for the

focal subject(s) of the study.



4     Discussion

In this paper we have described and illustrated Bayesian brain mapping (BBM), a personal-

ized functional brain network mapping technique that leverages population information through

population-derived priors for highly reliable network topography and between-network FC es-

timation. Those priors use established network maps or parcellations as templates, producing

individual-specific analogues of known networks. The priors relax constraints of the template, al-

lowing for overlap between networks and differential engagement within networks. The powerful


                                                 19
noise reduction properties of the priors facilitate reliable estimation of individualized functional

topography with moderate scan duration, mitigating the need for extensive scanning of individu-

als (Mejia et al., 2020; Derman, 2026). We also provide resources to facilitate its implementation,

including a demo illustrating the BayesBrainMap R package functions for prior estimation, model

fitting, and inference, as well as HCP-derived priors based on a range of templates.

BBM lowers the barrier to personalized functional brain network mapping by reducing required

scan duration through noise-mitigating informative priors, while avoiding heavy computational

demands associated with multi-subject hierarchical models. Furthermore, once the priors have

been established, model estimation is fast and parallelizable over multiple subjects. For experi-

ments involving healthy adults, the HCP-derived priors we provide here can be applied directly,

saving time and simplifying the analysis pipeline. For studies of other populations, our pipeline

can be adapted to produce priors using other publicly available resources or data from the focal

study.

Several limitations of the current BBM framework should be noted. First, priors should only

be applied to study individuals coming from the same or similar populations. As such, the

HCP-derived priors we share should not be utilized for the study of populations other than

healthy young adults, such as children or the elderly. Other large publicly available datasets

available facilitate the use of BBM for certain populations including Alzheimer’s disease (Mueller

et al., 2005), adolescents (Casey et al., 2018), infants (Edwards et al., 2022), and many others.

However, for studies of rarer populations it may be difficult to achieve samples large enough

to construct accurate BBM priors with the current prior estimation methods. Second, BBM

is currently designed for application to a single population; studies involving multiple groups

typically construct priors based on equal representation from each group, but a mixture distri-

bution would arguably better represent the population in this context. Third, BBM does not

currently incorporate harmonization for multi-site datasets, which is a limitation for consor-

tium datasets like the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (Mueller et al., 2005) or the

Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (Di Martino et al., 2014). Finally, while it is possible

to incorporate spatial priors into BBM for added accuracy and power (Mejia et al., 2023), the

current implementation is computationally intensive, limiting its practical utility.



                                                20
Several areas of future work are planned to address these limitations and extend the capabili-

ties of BBM. These include transfer learning to adapt priors to new populations without large

training samples, algorithms for computationally efficient spatial modeling to enhance accuracy

and power, inclusion of covariates and nuisance effects such as site and scanner, and mixture

priors for heterogeneous populations. All extensions will be implemented in the BayesBrainMap

R package as they are developed. We also plan to derive and share topography and connectivity

priors from other publicly available resources to facilitate the use of Bayesian brain mapping for

personalized functional brain mapping in a wider variety of populations.



5    Conclusion

Bayesian brain mapping (BBM) provides a scalable, flexible, and computationally convenient

framework for personalized functional brain network mapping. BBM employs population-derived

priors corresponding to established network maps to mitigate noise, thus enhancing accuracy

and power while reducing scan duration requirements. Several resources accompanying this

manuscript, including the BayesBrainMap R package, pre-estimated HCP-derived priors, and

user-friendly demos, lower the barrier to adoption of BBM for personalized functional network

mapping. The BBM framework and these openly available resources serve to make precision

functional mapping accessible across a wider range of research and clinical contexts.



6    Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health through the National

Institute on Aging [Grant No. R01 AG083919 (to A.F.M.)], the National Institute of Men-

tal Health’s National Research Service Award [Grant No. F31 MH140552 (to E.R.B.)], and

the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship [Grant No. DGE-2234667 (to

E.R.B.)].




                                               21
References

Beckmann, C. F., Mackay, C. E., Filippini, N., and Smith, S. M. (2009). Group comparison of

  resting-state fMRI data using multi-subject ICA and dual regression. Neuroimage, 47(Suppl

  1):S148.

Beckmann, C. F. and Smith, S. M. (2004). Probabilistic independent component analysis for

  functional magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 23(2):137–152.

Bijsterbosch, J., Woolrich, M., Glasser, M., Robinson, E., Beckmann, C., Van Essen, D., Harri-

  son, S., and Smith, S. (2018). The relationship between spatial configuration and functional

  connectivity of brain regions. eLife, 7:e32992.

Bijsterbosch, J. D., Beckmann, C. F., Woolrich, M. W., Smith, S. M., and Harrison, S. J.

  (2019). The relationship between spatial configuration and functional connectivity of brain

  regions revisited. Elife, 8:e44890.

Bijsterbosch, J. D., Farahibozorg, S.-R., Glasser, M. F., Van Essen, D., Snyder, L. H., Woolrich,

  M. W., and Smith, S. M. (2023). Evaluating functional brain organization in individuals and

  identifying contributions to network overlap. Imaging Neuroscience, 1:1–19.

Braga, R. M. and Buckner, R. L. (2017). Parallel interdigitated distributed networks within the

  individual estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Neuron, 95(2):457–471.

Bright, M. G., Tench, C. R., and Murphy, K. (2017). Potential pitfalls when denoising resting

  state fMRI data using nuisance regression. NeuroImage, 154:159–168.

Butler, E. R., Alloy, L. B., Pham, D. D., Samia, N. I., Nusslock, R., and Mejia, A. F. (2026).

  Utility and validity of group atlas versus personalized functional network approaches for de-

  pressive constructs. bioRxiv.

Butler, E. R., Samia, N. I., Mejia, A. F., Pham, D. D., Pines, A., and Nusslock, R. (2025).

  Sex differences in response to violence: role of salience network expansion and connectivity

  on depression. Translational Psychiatry, 15(1):427.

Casey, B. J., Cannonier, T., Conley, M. I., Cohen, A. O., Barch, D. M., Heitzeg, M. M.,

  Soules, M. E., Teslovich, T., Dellarco, D. V., Garavan, H., et al. (2018). The adolescent

                                               22
  brain cognitive development (abcd) study: imaging acquisition across 21 sites. Developmental

  cognitive neuroscience, 32:43–54.

Chen, Y., Wiesel, A., Eldar, Y. C., and Hero, A. O. (2010). Shrinkage algorithms for mmse

  covariance estimation. IEEE transactions on signal processing, 58(10):5016–5029.

Cui, Z., Li, H., Xia, C. H., Larsen, B., Adebimpe, A., Baum, G. L., Cieslak, M., Gur, R. E.,

  Gur, R. C., Moore, T. M., et al. (2020). Individual variation in functional topography of

  association networks in youth. Neuron, 106(2):340–353.

Cui, Z., Pines, A. R., Larsen, B., Sydnor, V. J., Li, H., Adebimpe, A., Alexander-Bloch, A. F.,

  Bassett, D. S., Bertolero, M., Calkins, M. E., et al. (2022). Linking individual differences in

  personalized functional network topography to psychopathology in youth. Biological psychia-

  try, 92(12):973–983.

Dadi, K., Varoquaux, G., Machlouzarides-Shalit, A., Gorgolewski, K. J., Wassermann, D.,

  Thirion, B., and Mensch, A. (2020). Fine-grain atlases of functional modes for fmri anal-

  ysis. NeuroImage, 221:117126.

Dai, T., Guo, Y., Initiative, A. D. N., et al. (2017). Predicting individual brain functional

  connectivity using a bayesian hierarchical model. NeuroImage, 147:772–787.

Derman, D. (2026). Individual-level characterization of the developing brain using advanced

  statistical methods. ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, No. 3295466483.

Derman, D., Pham, D. D., Mejia, A. F., and Ferradal, S. L. (2025). Individual patterns of

  functional connectivity in neonates as revealed by surface-based Bayesian modeling. Imaging

  Neuroscience, 3:imag_a_00504.

Di Martino, A., Yan, C.-G., Li, Q., Denio, E., Castellanos, F. X., Alaerts, K., Anderson, J. S.,

  Assaf, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., Dapretto, M., et al. (2014). The autism brain imaging data

  exchange: towards a large-scale evaluation of the intrinsic brain architecture in autism. Molec-

  ular psychiatry, 19(6):659.

Edwards, A. D., Rueckert, D., Smith, S. M., Abo Seada, S., Alansary, A., Almalbis, J., Allsop,

  J., Andersson, J., Arichi, T., Arulkumaran, S., Bastiani, M., Batalle, D., Baxter, L., Bozek, J.,

                                                23
  Braithwaite, E., Brandon, J., Carney, O., Chew, A., Christiaens, D., Chung, R., Colford, K.,

  Cordero-Grande, L., Counsell, S. J., Cullen, H., Cupitt, J., Curtis, C., Davidson, A., Deprez,

  M., Dillon, L., Dimitrakopoulou, K., Dimitrova, R., Duff, E., Falconer, S., Farahibozorg,

  S. R., Fitzgibbon, S. P., Gao, J., Gaspar, A., Harper, N., Harrison, S. J., Hughes, E. J.,

  Hutter, J., Jenkinson, M., Jbabdi, S., Jones, E., Karolis, V., Kyriakopoulou, V., Lenz, G.,

  Makropoulos, A., Malik, S., Mason, L., Mortari, F., Nosarti, C., Nunes, R. G., O’Keeffe, C.,

  O’Muircheartaigh, J., Patel, H., Passerat-Palmbach, J., Pietsch, M., Price, A. N., Robinson,

  E. C., Rutherford, M. A., Schuh, A., Sotiropoulos, S., Steinweg, J., Teixeira, R. P. A. G.,

  Tenev, T., Tournier, J. D., Tusor, N., Uus, A., Vecchiato, K., Williams, L. Z. J., Wright, R.,

  Wurie, J., and Hajnal, J. V. (2022). The developing human connectome project neonatal data

  release. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16:886772.

Farahibozorg, S.-R., Bijsterbosch, J. D., Gong, W., Jbabdi, S., Smith, S. M., Harrison, S. J., and

  Woolrich, M. W. (2021). Hierarchical modelling of functional brain networks in population

  and individuals from big fMRI data. NeuroImage, 243:118513.

Faskowitz, J., Esfahlani, F. Z., Jo, Y., Sporns, O., and Betzel, R. F. (2020). Edge-centric

  functional network representations of human cerebral cortex reveal overlapping system-level

  architecture. Nature neuroscience, 23(12):1644–1654.

Finn, E. S., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., Rosenberg, M. D., Huang, J., Chun, M. M., Papademetris,

  X., and Constable, R. T. (2015). Functional connectome fingerprinting: identifying individuals

  using patterns of brain connectivity. Nature neuroscience, 18(11):1664–1671.

Gaddis, A., Lidstone, D., Nebel, M., Griffiths, R., Mostofsky, S., Mejia, A., and Barrett, F.

  (2022). Psilocybin induces spatially constrained alterations in thalamic functional organizaton

  and connectivity. Neuroimage, 260:119434.

Gordon, E. M., Laumann, T. O., Adeyemo, B., and Petersen, S. E. (2017a). Individual variability

  of the system-level organization of the human brain. Cerebral cortex, 27(1):386–399.

Gordon, E. M., Laumann, T. O., Gilmore, A. W., Newbold, D. J., Greene, D. J., Berg, J. J.,

  Ortega, M., Hoyt-Drazen, C., Gratton, C., Sun, H., et al. (2017b). Precision functional

  mapping of individual human brains. Neuron, 95(4):791–807.


                                               24
Gratton, C., Sun, H., and Petersen, S. E. (2018). Control networks and hubs. Psychophysiology,

  55(3):e13032.

Griffanti, L., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Beckmann, C. F., Auerbach, E. J., Douaud, G., Sexton,

  C. E., Zsoldos, E., Ebmeier, K. P., Filippini, N., Mackay, C. E., et al. (2014). ICA-based

  artefact removal and accelerated fMRI acquisition for improved resting state network imaging.

  Neuroimage, 95:232–247.

Guo, Y. and Tang, L. (2013). A hierarchical model for probabilistic independent component

  analysis of multi-subject fMRI studies. Biometrics, 69(4):970–981.

Harrison, S. J., Bijsterbosch, J. D., Segerdahl, A. R., Fitzgibbon, S. P., Farahibozorg, S.-R.,

  Duff, E. P., Smith, S. M., and Woolrich, M. W. (2020). Modelling subject variability in the

  spatial and temporal characteristics of functional modes. NeuroImage, 222:117226.

Harrison, S. J., Woolrich, M. W., Robinson, E. C., Glasser, M. F., Beckmann, C. F., Jenkinson,

  M., and Smith, S. M. (2015). Large-scale probabilistic functional modes from resting state

  fmri. NeuroImage, 109:217–231.

Hermosillo, R. J., Moore, L. A., Feczko, E., Miranda-Domínguez, Ó., Pines, A., Dworetsky, A.,

  Conan, G., Mooney, M. A., Randolph, A., Graham, A., et al. (2024). A precision functional

  atlas of personalized network topography and probabilities. Nature neuroscience, 27(5):1000–

  1013.

Herzberg, M. P., Nielsen, A. N., Brady, R., Kaplan, S., Alexopoulos, D., Meyer, D., Arora, J.,

  Miller, J. P., Smyser, T. A., Barch, D. M., Rogers, C. E., Warner, B. B., Smyser, C. D., and

  Luby, J. L. (2024). Maternal prenatal social disadvantage and neonatal functional connectivity:

  Associations with psychopathology symptoms at age 12 months. Developmental Psychology,

  60(9):1562–1579.

Honnorat, N., Adeli, E., Zhao, Q., Pfefferbaum, A., Sullivan, E. V., and Pohl, K. (2019). Co-

  variance shrinkage for dynamic functional connectivity. In International Workshop on Con-

  nectomics in Neuroimaging, pages 32–41. Springer.

Honnorat, N. and Habes, M. (2022). Covariance shrinkage can assess and improve functional

  connectomes. NeuroImage, 256:119229.

                                               25
Keller, A. S., Pines, A. R., Shanmugan, S., Sydnor, V. J., Cui, Z., Bertolero, M. A., Barzilay,

  R., Alexander-Bloch, A. F., Byington, N., Chen, A., et al. (2023). Personalized functional

  brain network topography is associated with individual differences in youth cognition. Nature

  communications, 14(1):8411.

Kong, R., Li, J., Orban, C., Sabuncu, M. R., Liu, H., Schaefer, A., Sun, N., Zuo, X.-N., Holmes,

  A. J., Eickhoff, S. B., et al. (2019). Spatial topography of individual-specific cortical networks

  predicts human cognition, personality, and emotion. Cerebral cortex, 29(6):2533–2551.

Kong, R., Yang, Q., Gordon, E., Xue, A., Yan, X., Orban, C., Zuo, X.-N., Spreng, N., Ge,

  T., Holmes, A., et al. (2021). Individual-specific areal-level parcellations improve functional

  connectivity prediction of behavior. Cerebral Cortex, 31(10):4477–4500.

Ledoit, O. and Wolf, M. (2004). A well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional covariance

  matrices. Journal of multivariate analysis, 88(2):365–411.

Li, H., Satterthwaite, T. D., and Fan, Y. (2017). Large-scale sparse functional networks from

  resting state fmri. NeuroImage, 156:1–13.

Li, X., Gan, J. Q., and Wang, H. (2018). Collective sparse symmetric non-negative matrix fac-

  torization for identifying overlapping communities in resting-state brain functional networks.

  NeuroImage, 166:259–275.

Li, Y., Liu, A., Fu, X., Mckeown, M. J., Wang, Z. J., and Chen, X. (2022). Atlas-guided parcel-

  lation: Individualized functionally-homogenous parcellation in cerebral cortex. Computers in

  Biology and Medicine, 150:106078.

Lynch, C. J., Elbau, I. G., Ng, T., Ayaz, A., Zhu, S., Wolk, D., Manfredi, N., Johnson, M.,

  Chang, M., Chou, J., et al. (2024). Frontostriatal salience network expansion in individuals

  in depression. Nature, 633(8030):624–633.

Margulies, D. S., Ghosh, S. S., Goulas, A., Falkiewicz, M., Huntenburg, J. M., Langs, G., Bezgin,

  G., Eickhoff, S. B., Castellanos, F. X., Petrides, M., et al. (2016). Situating the default-mode

  network along a principal gradient of macroscale cortical organization. Proceedings of the

  National Academy of Sciences, 113(44):12574–12579.


                                                26
Mejia, A. F., Bolin, D., Spencer, D. A., and Eloyan, A. (2025). Leveraging population infor-

  mation in brain connectivity via bayesian ica with a novel informative prior for correlation

  matrices. Biostatistics, 26(1):kxaf022.

Mejia, A. F., Bolin, D., Yue, Y. R., Wang, J., Caffo, B. S., and Nebel, M. B. (2023). Template

  independent component analysis with spatial priors for accurate subject-level brain network

  estimation and inference. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 32(2):413–433.

Mejia, A. F., Nebel, M. B., Barber, A. D., Choe, A. S., Pekar, J. J., Caffo, B. S., and Lindquist,

  M. A. (2018). Improved estimation of subject-level functional connectivity using full and

  partial correlation with empirical bayes shrinkage. NeuroImage, 172:478–491.

Mejia, A. F., Nebel, M. B., Shou, H., Crainiceanu, C. M., Pekar, J. J., Mostofsky, S., Caffo,

  B., and Lindquist, M. A. (2015). Improving reliability of subject-level resting-state fmri

  parcellation with shrinkage estimators. NeuroImage, 112:14–29.

Mejia, A. F., Nebel, M. B., Wang, Y., Caffo, B. S., and Guo, Y. (2020). Template independent

  component analysis: Targeted and reliable estimation of subject-level brain networks using big

  data population priors. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 115(531):1151–1177.

Mueller, S. G., Weiner, M. W., Thal, L. J., Petersen, R. C., Jack, C., Jagust, W., Trojanowski,

  J. Q., Toga, A. W., and Beckett, L. (2005). The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

  Neuroimaging Clinics, 15(4):869–877.

Pang, C., Sun, X., Zhao, J., Liang, X., Sun, L., Lin, Q., Sun, J., Lu, X., Dong, Q., Zhang,

  L., et al. (2026). Personalized functional topography–based multisite brain age prediction

  modeling reveals divergent neurodevelopment in major depression. Proceedings of the National

  Academy of Sciences, 123(11):e2519586123.

Pervaiz, U., Vidaurre, D., Woolrich, M. W., and Smith, S. M. (2020). Optimising network

  modelling methods for fmri. NeuroImage, 211:116604.

Pham, D. D., McDonald, D. J., Ding, L., Nebel, M. B., and Mejia, A. F. (2023). Less is more:

  balancing noise reduction and data retention in fmri with data-driven scrubbing. NeuroImage,

  270:119972.


                                               27
Power, J. D., Lynch, C. J., Silver, B. M., Dubin, M. J., Martin, A., and Jones, R. M. (2019).

  Distinctions among real and apparent respiratory motions in human fmri data. NeuroImage,

  201:116041.

Power, J. D., Schlaggar, B. L., Lessov-Schlaggar, C. N., and Petersen, S. E. (2013). Evidence

  for hubs in human functional brain networks. Neuron, 79(4):798–813.

Pruim, R. H., Mennes, M., van Rooij, D., Llera, A., Buitelaar, J. K., and Beckmann, C. F.

  (2015). Ica-aroma: A robust ica-based strategy for removing motion artifacts from fmri data.

  Neuroimage, 112:267–277.

Rahim, M., Thirion, B., and Varoquaux, G. (2019). Population shrinkage of covariance (posce)

  for better individual brain functional-connectivity estimation. Medical image analysis, 54:138–

  148.

Shou, H., Eloyan, A., Nebel, M. B., Mejia, A., Pekar, J. J., Mostofsky, S., Caffo, B., Lindquist,

  M. A., and Crainiceanu, C. M. (2014). Shrinkage prediction of seed-voxel brain connectivity

  using resting state fmri. NeuroImage, 102:938–944.

Smith, S. M., Miller, K. L., Moeller, S., Xu, J., Auerbach, E. J., Woolrich, M. W., Beckmann,

  C. F., Jenkinson, M., Andersson, J., Glasser, M. F., et al. (2012). Temporally-independent

  functional modes of spontaneous brain activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-

  ences, 109(8):3131–3136.

Smith, S. M., Miller, K. L., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Webster, M., Beckmann, C. F., Nichols,

  T. E., Ramsey, J. D., and Woolrich, M. W. (2011). Network modelling methods for fmri.

  Neuroimage, 54(2):875–891.

Smith, S. M., Vidaurre, D., Beckmann, C. F., Glasser, M. F., Jenkinson, M., Miller, K. L.,

  Nichols, T. E., Robinson, E. C., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Woolrich, M. W., et al. (2013). Func-

  tional connectomics from resting-state fmri. Trends in cognitive sciences, 17(12):666–682.

Su, S.-C., Caffo, B., Garrett-Mayer, E., and Bassett, S. S. (2009). Modified test statistics by

  inter-voxel variance shrinkage with an application to f mri. Biostatistics, 10(2):219–227.




                                               28
Tong, Y., Hocke, L. M., and Frederick, B. B. (2019). Low frequency systemic hemodynamic

  “noise” in resting state BOLD fMRI: Characteristics, causes, implications, mitigation strate-

  gies, and applications. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 13.

Van Essen, D. C., Smith, S. M., Barch, D. M., Behrens, T. E., Yacoub, E., Ugurbil, K., WU-Minn

  HCP Consortium, et al. (2013). The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: An overview.

  NeuroImage, 80:62–79.

Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Poline, J.-B., and Thirion, B. (2010). Brain covariance selection:

  better individual functional connectivity models using population prior. Advances in neural

  information processing systems, 23.

Xue, A., Kong, R., Yang, Q., Eldaief, M. C., Angeli, P. A., DiNicola, L. M., Braga, R. M.,

  Buckner, R. L., and Yeo, B. T. (2021). The detailed organization of the human cerebellum es-

  timated by intrinsic functional connectivity within the individual. Journal of neurophysiology,

  125(2):358–384.

Yeo, B. T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., Roffman,

  J. L., Smoller, J. W., Zöllei, L., Polimeni, J. R., et al. (2011). The organization of the human

  cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of neurophysiology.

Zhao, S., Su, H., Cong, J., Wen, X., Yang, H., Chen, P., Wu, G., Fan, Q., Ma, Y., Xu, X., Hu,

  C., Li, H., Keller, A., Pines, A., Chen, R., and Cui, Z. (2024). Hierarchical individual variation

  and socioeconomic impact on personalized functional network topography in children. BMC

  Medicine, 22(1):556.




                                                29
                                 Template                     Prior Mean




               Yeo17
               MSC
               GICA15
               PROFUMO




Figure S.1: Dice overlap matrices comparing each template with its prior mean. Yeo17 and
MSC used hard labels; GICA and PROFUMO maps were thresholded at |z| ≥ 2 before comput-
ing Dice. For MSC, GICA and PROFUMO, the networks were matched to the Yeo17 networks
based on spatial overlap, so that the network ordering of the matrices is approximately consis-
tent across templates.

                                              30
                          Yeo17                               MSC




                         GICA15                           PROFUMO




Figure S.2: Functional connectivity (FC) priors for various templates. The empirical element-
wise population mean of FC across the prior training sample is shown. The empirical population
mean and variance are not used directly in the BBM model. Rather, the inverse-Wishart or
permuted Cholesky prior is built based on the FC training samples.




                                             31
