                                         ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                            1




                                              Attention-Based Variational Framework for
                                         Joint and Individual Components Learning with
                                                  Applications in Brain Network Analysis
                                                                  Yifei Zhang, Meimei Liu, and Zhengwu Zhang
arXiv:2601.17073v1 [cs.LG] 23 Jan 2026




                                                                                                 Abstract

                                                   Brain organization is increasingly characterized through multiple imaging modalities, most notably
                                               structural connectivity (SC) and functional connectivity (FC). Integrating these inherently distinct yet
                                               complementary data sources is essential for uncovering the cross-modal patterns that drive behavioral
                                               phenotypes. However, effective integration is hindered by the high dimensionality and non-linearity
                                               of connectome data, complex non-linear SC–FC coupling, and the challenge of disentangling shared
                                               information from modality-specific variations. To address these issues, we propose the Cross-Modal
                                               Joint-Individual Variational Network (CM-JIVNet), a unified probabilistic framework designed to learn
                                               factorized latent representations from paired SC–FC datasets. Our model utilizes a multi-head attention
                                               fusion module to capture non-linear cross-modal dependencies while isolating independent, modality-
                                               specific signals. Validated on Human Connectome Project Young Adult (HCP-YA) data, CM-JIVNet
                                               demonstrates superior performance in cross-modal reconstruction and behavioral trait prediction. By
                                               effectively disentangling joint and individual feature spaces, CM-JIVNet provides a robust, interpretable,
                                               and scalable solution for large-scale multimodal brain analysis.


                                                                                               Index Terms

                                                   Brain connectivity, Variational autoencoder, Structural-functional connectivity, Multimodal integra-
                                               tion, Joint and individual components.


                                           Y. Zhang is with the Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, USA (e-mail:
                                         yifei.zhang.yz2489@yale.edu).
                                           M. Liu is with the Department of Statistics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA (e-mail: meimeiliu@vt.edu).
                                           Z. Zhang is with the Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
                                         Hill, NC, USA (e-mail: zhengwu zhang@unc.edu). Corresponding author: Zhengwu Zhang.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                      2



                                        I. I NTRODUCTION

  Modern neuroimaging yields complementary views of brain organization through functional
connectivity (FC), derived from fMRI, and structural connectivity (SC), via dMRI [1]. FC
captures temporal correlations in brain activity, while SC delineates the underlying white matter
infrastructure. A central goal in neuroscience is to understand the intricate relationship between
these modalities to decipher how anatomical structure shapes functional dynamics [2], [3]. While
direct anatomical links contribute to functional coupling [4], [5], substantial evidence indicates
that complex, network-wide interactions and indirect pathways mediated by SC are crucial for
explaining the full repertoire of FC patterns [6].
  Significant research efforts have aimed to model this SC-FC relationship using diverse compu-
tational strategies, ranging from biophysical simulations to graph-theoretic analyses and statistical
learning techniques [7]–[11]. Although these methods provide valuable insights, they often face
difficulties in fully predicting empirical FC from SC, typically explaining only a moderate fraction
of its variance and highlighting limitations in capturing the system’s non-linearity and complexity
[12]. Concurrently, techniques like Joint and Individual Variation Explained (JIVE) [13], [14]
have focused specifically on disentangling joint and modality-specific sources of variance, yet
their effectiveness can be constrained by inherent linear assumptions [15]. These challenges,
specifically predictive ceilings in modeling SC-FC coupling and linearity constraints in variance
decomposition, motivate the development of powerful, flexible frameworks leveraging non-linear
latent variable modeling.
  Deep generative models, particularly Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) and Graph Autoen-
coders (GATEs) [16]–[18], represent a promising direction, offering the ability to learn compact,
non-linear latent representations of high-dimensional connectome data. However, their appli-
cation to the joint analysis of FC and SC remains underdeveloped. Existing deep learning
efforts, while showing progress in specific tasks, often face several drawbacks when considering
comprehensive multimodal integration: (i) They typically focus on single modality modeling or
unidirectional prediction, such as predicting FC from SC. For example, Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP)-based approaches have demonstrated strong predictive performance—reporting group-
average correlations up to 0.9 and individual-level correlations around 0.55 for FC prediction
from SC [19]. However, this unidirectional framework neglects the simultaneous, bidirectional
modeling and joint generation necessary for understanding the interdependent nature of FC–SC
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                      3



relationships. (ii) The architectures employed, including standard MLPs as used by [19], are
frequently generic and not specifically adapted for the distinct characteristics and structures
(e.g., graph topology, symmetry, sparsity) of FC and SC data, potentially limiting representational
capacity and biological interpretability. (iii) Crucially, they generally lack explicit mechanisms to
disentangle joint and modality-specific availabilities, which is vital for a nuanced understanding
of multimodal brain organization.
  This work addresses two interconnected objectives in multi-modal connectome analysis: (1) to
learn interpretable latent representations that factorize paired SC-FC data into joint and individual
components while maintaining high-fidelity reconstruction, and (2) to leverage these disentangled
representations for enhanced analysis of structure-function relationships and improved prediction
of individual cognitive traits.
  More specifically, we propose the Cross-Modal Joint-Individual Variational Network (CM-
JIVNet). This novel framework is designed for simultaneous joint generation and analysis of FC
and SC, integrating connectivity-tailored deep learning architectures with an explicit attention-
based mechanism for latent space disentanglement. Our key contributions are:
  1) A joint generation and disentanglement framework: CM-JIVNet is a unified VAE ar-
      chitecture capable of generating both FCs and SCs. Crucially, it can disentangle these
      networks’ latent representations into components reflecting joint cross-modal information
      and modality-specific variations.
  2) Connectivity-tailored architectures: We employ specialized encoder and decoder structures
      (leveraging Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Residual Networks (ResNets),
      adapted for graph-structured data) optimized for the distinct structures of FC and SC data,
      enhancing representational power and generative fidelity.
  3) Attention-based latent space fusion and separation: We incorporate a Query-Key-Value
      (QKV) multi-head attention mechanism directly within the latent space. This module
      dynamically fuses information to form the joint latent representation while also isolating
      the independent latent variables for each modality, enabling effective modeling of joint
      variance and specific features.
  4) Comprehensive empirical validation: We rigorously evaluate CM-JIVNet on a large cohort
      of 1,065 subjects from the Human Connectome Project Young Adult (HCP-YA) dataset.
      We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance through significantly lower Fréchet Incep-
      tion Distance (FID) scores for generative quality, improved accuracy in cross-modality
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                  4



      prediction, and behavioral traits prediction compared to relevant baselines.


                             II. DATASETS AND P REPROCESSING

A. HCP Dataset

  The Human Connectome Project Young Adult (HCP-YA) [20] is a large-scale effort that
provides high-quality T1-weighted MRI, dMRI, and resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data, along
with behavioral assessments, for over 1,200 healthy adults. In this study, we processed 1,065
subjects (age range: 22–35 years) who had both T1 and dMRI available. Below, we briefly
outline our image preprocessing pipeline for deriving FC and SC matrices.


B. Data Preprocessing

  1) Structural Connectivity: We processed minimally preprocessed dMRI and T1 data for each
HCP-YA subject using the population-based structural connectome (PSC) mapping framework
[21]. The dMRI acquisition comprised six runs with three diffusion-weighting shells (b = 1000,
2000, and 3000 s/mm2 ), each collected with opposing phase-encoding polarities. This yielded
approximately 90 gradient directions per shell and six interspersed b0 volumes per run (270
diffusion-weighted volumes total) at 1.25 mm isotropic resolution [22]. T1-weighted images
were acquired at 0.7 mm isotropic resolution [22]. PSC leverages a reproducible probabilistic
tractography algorithm [23] constrained by anatomical priors from the T1 image to reduce bias
in tract reconstruction. We parcellated the cortex into 68 regions of interest (ROIs) using the
Desikan–Killiany atlas [24]. To extract streamlines, gray-matter ROIs were dilated into adjacent
white matter, streamlines traversing multiple ROIs were segmented to isolate complete path-
ways, and outlier tracts were removed based on length and curvature criteria. Finally, structural
connectivity strength between each ROI pair was quantified by the number of reconstructed
streamlines, a measure widely used in imaging–genetics studies [25].
  2) Functional Connectivity: The HCP-YA rs-fMRI data include two left-right and two right-
left phase-encoded, eyes-open runs of 15 min each [22]. Imaging parameters were 2 mm3
isotropic voxels with 0.72 s repetition time (TR). For each run, we extracted the average BOLD
time series for each of the 68 cortical ROIs defined by Desikan et al [24]. Pairwise Pearson
correlation coefficients were computed between all ROI time courses, Fisher z-transformed,
averaged across the four runs, and then inverse-transformed back to correlation values.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                        5



C. Data Representation

  We represent brain connectivity as networks where nodes correspond to anatomically defined
ROIs and edges encode connectivity strength between region pairs. For each subject i, structural
                                               i
connectivity is denoted as a symmetric matrix XSC ∈ RV ×V , where entry XSC
                                                                         i
                                                                            [uv] quantifies
the number of white matter fiber tracts connecting regions u and v. The symmetry property
 i          i
XSC [uv] = XSC [vu] reflects the bidirectional nature of anatomical connections. Functional con-
                                                          i
nectivity is similarly represented as a symmetric matrix XFC ∈ RV ×V , where each entry XFC
                                                                                         i
                                                                                            [uv]
denotes the temporal correlation (typically Pearson correlation) between BOLD signal time
                                                                     i          i
series from regions u and v, satisfying the symmetric property that XFC [uv] = XFC [vu]. We
further vectorize each symmetric matrix by extracting its lower triangular elements, excluding
the diagonal. An analogous vectorization is also applied to functional connectivity. With a bit
                                i       i
of notation abuse, we also use XSC and XFC to denote the vectorized SC and FC for the subject
i, respectively.

                                           III. M ETHOD
                         i     i
  Given a dataset D = {(XSC , XFC )}N
                                    i=1 containing paired structural and functional brain con-

nectivity matrices from N subjects, we propose CM-JIVNet to learn interpretable latent repre-
sentations that capture both modality-joint and modality-specific patterns of brain connectivity.
CM-JIVNet addresses two interconnected goals: (i) to learn low-dimensional latent factors that
jointly encode joint and individual variations across SC and FC while preserving the ability
to accurately reconstruct each modality; (ii) to leverage these disentangled representations for
interpretable characterization of SC–FC coupling and improved prediction of individual traits
through multimodal information integration.


A. Model Overview

  An overview of the CM-JIVNet architecture is presented in Fig. 1. The model adopts a dual-
branch variational autoencoder structure that processes SC and FC connectomes through four
sequential modules:
  1) Dual VAE Encoders: Two modality-specific convolutional variational encoders indepen-
      dently process the FC and SC matrices to extract probabilistic latent representations.
      Each encoder outputs Gaussian distribution parameters (µfc , σ 2fc ) and (µsc , σ 2sc ), enabling
      stochastic latent sampling via the reparameterization trick.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                     6



  2) Attention-Based Cross-Modal Fusion: A multi-head self-attention and gating fusion
      module integrates the two latent spaces, identifying nonlinear dependencies between SC
      and FC.
  3) Joint–Individual Separation Module: The fused latent representation is decomposed into
      three statistically orthogonal components, i.e., joint, FC-specific, and SC-specific compo-
      nents, through an attention-guided separation mechanism. This decomposition extends the
      classical JIVE framework to a nonlinear variational setting, promoting interpretability by
      disentangling modality-common from modality-unique patterns.
  4) Dual VAE Decoder and Supervision: CM-JIVNet employs two modality-specific VAE
      decoders to reconstruct functional and structural connectivity data using likelihood models
      tailored to each modality. The FC decoder is implemented with a Gaussian likelihood and a
      ResNet-based architecture, whereas the SC decoder uses a Poisson likelihood parameterized
      by an MLP-based network. These decoders jointly enforce modality-consistent reconstruc-
      tion and serve as generative constraints for the latent representations. To introduce a trait-
      supervised version of CM-JIVNet, a two-stage training procedure is applied. The model
      is first trained using only reconstruction and regularization losses. A supervised trait-
      prediction head is then added and fine-tuned, during which both decoders remain active
      to preserve cross-modal reconstruction consistency.
  Together, these four modules form a unified generative framework that disentangles joint and
modality-specific representations of brain connectivity, enabling both interpretable cross-modal
analysis and predictive modeling.

B. Dual VAE Encoders

  We model the joint distribution of structural and functional connectivity through a latent
variable framework. Specifically, denote z ∈ Rd as the latent representation of the paired
connectome (XSC , XFC ). For notational simplicity, we drop the subject index i; all derivations
apply to each subject independently. The generative process is characterized by:
                                           Z
                          pθ (XSC , XFC ) = pθ (XSC , XFC |z)p(z)dz
where p(z) = N (0, I) represents the standard Gaussian prior over latent variables, and pθ (XSC , XFC |z)
characterizes how latent representations generate observable connectivity patterns. We assume
conditional independence of modalities given z:
                            pθ (XSC , XFC |z) = pθ (XSC |z) · pθ (XFC |z),
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                                  7




Fig. 1. Overview of the CM-JIVNet workflow. CM-JIVNet comprises four main modules. (1) Dual variational encoders
extract latent Gaussian parameters from the FC and SC connectivity matrices. (2) Attention-based fusion aligns the modality-
specific latent spaces through a multi-head self-attention and gating mechanism, capturing nonlinear SC–FC dependencies.
(3) Joint–individual separation decomposes the fused latent representation into three orthogonal components—joint, FC-
specific, and SC-specific—enhancing interpretability of cross-modal coupling. (4) Dual decoders and supervision (optional)
reconstruct each modality from its corresponding latent factors while separate branch (optional) encourages prediction of traits
from the learned latent factors. During training, reconstruction and prediction losses are optimized jointly under variational and
orthogonality regularization constraints.

where the latent variable z captures the coupling between SC and FC while allowing each
modality to follow its own generative process.
   However, a single entangled latent representation obscures interpretability. Understanding
brain connectivity mechanisms requires distinguishing which latent features are shared across
modalities and which are modality-specific. Prior work [2] suggests that SC and FC reflect both
overlapping and distinct neural mechanisms: joint components encode fundamental organizational
principles constrained by anatomy, while modality-specific components capture features unique
to structural wiring or dynamic neural activity.
   We therefore decompose the latent representation z into three interpretable, factorized com-
ponents: (i) a joint factor z joint capturing connectivity patterns shared across both modalities,
(ii) an SC-specific factor z ind
                             sc representing anatomical features unique to structure, and (iii) an

FC-specific factor z ind
                     fc encoding functional dynamics independent of structural constraints. The

complete latent vector is defined as: z = [z joint ; z ind    ind
                                                       sc ; z fc ]. To achieve JIVE-like disentanglement

[14], we ensure that each component captures non-overlapping information by enforcing mutual
orthogonality between the latent subspaces. Since each latent component is modeled as a Gaus-
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                               8



sian distribution with mean µ and variance σ 2 (detailed in the encoder specification below), we
encourage the directions of the posterior mean vectors to be orthonormal:
                                 ⟨µ̂a , µ̂b ⟩ = δab ,   a, b ∈ {joint, sc, fc},
where µ̂ = µ/∥µ∥ denotes the normalized mean vector and δab is the Kronecker delta (0 if a, b
are different and 1 if they are the same.)
  With this decomposition, we reformulate the generative model by defining modality-specific
latent combinations: z full              ind        full              ind
                       sc = [z joint ; z sc ] and z fc = [z joint ; z fc ]. This yields:

                             pθ (XSC , XFC |z) = pθ (XSC |z full              full
                                                            sc ) · pθ (XFC |z fc ).

Each modality is generated from a combination of joint factors capturing cross-modal depen-
dencies and modality-specific factors capturing unique characteristics.
  To learn this factorized generative model from observed data, we employ a VAE framework
that approximates the intractable posterior p(z joint , z ind    ind
                                                          sc , z fc |XSC , XFC ) with a Gaussian:

                                       qϕ (z joint , z ind    ind
                                                       sc , z fc |XSC , XFC ).

Now, the goal becomes estimating/obtaining these latent variables z joint , z ind        ind
                                                                              sc , and z fc from

XSC , XFC .
  We design dual VAE encoders to achieve this goal. First, two modality-specific encoders
independently produce parameters of diagonal Gaussian distributions:
                                                              2
                           qϕ (z̃ full
                                                                  
                                  fc | XFC ) = N µfc , diag(σ fc ) ,

                                                              2
                           qϕ (z̃ full
                                                                  
                                  sc | XSC ) = N µsc , diag(σ sc ) ,

Note that z̃ full      full
             fc and z̃ sc capture modality-specific information independently and we have not

separated the joint latent factor z joint , SC-specific factor z ind                    ind
                                                                 sc , and FC-specific z fc yet. In other

words, z̃ full               ind         full               ind
          fc ̸= [z joint ; z fc ] and z̃ sc ̸= [z joint , z sc ]. The key challenge lies in transforming these

unimodal representations into the disentangled components that satisfy the orthonormal con-
straints. The following subsection presents our attention-based fusion mechanism that achieves
this disentanglement.

C. Cross-Modal Joint-Individual Separation Network

  The encoder outputs z̃ full    full
                         fc , z̃ sc ∈ R
                                       dz
                                          are produced independently without cross-modal infor-
mation exchange. To decompose them into joint and individual components (z joint , z ind    ind
                                                                                     sc , z fc ),

we must determine which features represent common patterns across both modalities versus
which are modality-specific.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                           9



   To achieve the disentangled factorization, we develop multi-head self-attention to learn subject-
specific cross-modal alignments. For each subject, we compute attention weights quantifying
how each feature in z̃ full                             full
                       fc relates to each feature in z̃ sc . Features exhibiting strong cross-modal

correlation should contribute to the joint component z joint , while weakly correlated features
should remain in the individual components z ind      ind
                                             fc and z sc .

   1) Attention-based Fusion: We first project the latent features into a shared space through
modality-specific linear transformations hfc = WFC z̃ full  dz
                                                      fc ∈ R ,         hsc = WSC z̃ full
                                                                                    sc ∈ R
                                                                                          dz
                                                                                             and then
stack them into a matrix token H = [hfc , hsc ]. This token will then be processed using multiple
attention heads: head(j) = Attention(Qj , K j , V j ), where Qj , K j , V j are queries, keys and values
obtained via linear transformations of H. Outputs from all attention heads are concatenated and
linearly transformed into H                          e ∈ R2×dz .
                           e = [h̃fc , h̃sc ], where H
   2) Joint and Individual Components Separation: To allow flexible adjustment of each modal-
ity’s contribution, we introduce a learnable gating modulation to rescale each column in H
                                                                                         e and
then fuse them based on hfused = ĥfc + ĥsc , where ĥj = mj h̃j for j ∈ {fc, sc} and mj ∈ (0, 1)
is learned through a sigmoid gating operation from h̃j . The fused representation hfused ∈ Rdz
summarizes the shared information from both modalities.
   The fused vector is then passed through a linear transformation that expands its dimensionality
to 6dz , yielding v ∈ R6dz . This vector is then partitioned into six contiguous segments of size
dz :
                                                                     vℓ ∈ Rdz .
                                                      
                           v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 , v5 , v6 = Split(v),
Each sliced segment is subsequently passed through a modality-specific linear transformation
to obtain the final posterior parameters, (µjoint , log σ joint , µind        ind   ind        ind
                                                                   fc , log σ fc , µsc , log σ sc ). These

parameters can be used to generate joint and individual embeddings, z joint , z ind       ind
                                                                                fc , and µsc .

   To ensure that the three components capture non-overlapping information, we constrain them
to be orthogonal to each other with the following loss function:
                        Lortho = cos2 µjoint , µind   + cos2 µjoint , µind
                                                                          
                                                fc                     sc
                                                                                                      (1)
                                 + cos2 µind      ind
                                                      
                                           fc , µsc     ,
where cos(a, b) = ⟨a, b⟩/(∥a∥ ∥b∥ + ε) for a small ε > 0.
   Unlike classical JIVE [13] that relies on linear projections, multi-head attention captures
complex, nonlinear relationships between modalities. Moreover, classical JIVE decomposes each
data matrix into joint structure, individual structure, and noise via SVD-based constrained fac-
torization requiring orthogonal subspaces. CM-JIVNet achieves an analogous decomposition
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                      10



z = [z joint ; z ind    ind
                 fc ; z sc ] in latent space with three advantages: (i) nonlinearity via deep networks

captures complex SC-FC relationships beyond linear correlation; (ii) probabilistic treatment
quantifies decomposition uncertainty; (iii) attention-based learning enables subject-specific rather
than population-average factorizations. The orthogonality constraint in Eq. (1) mirrors JIVE’s
orthogonality requirement but operates in the latent space rather than observed data.


D. Dual VAE Decoders

  The disentangled latent components or scores must be decoded back to connectivity matrices
to enable reconstruction-based training and the generative nature of the proposed model. We
employ modality-specific decoders that map from latent scores to brain networks: the FC decoder
reconstructs functional connectivity from z full              ind
                                            fc = [z joint ; z fc ], while the SC decoder reconstructs

structural connectivity from z full              ind
                               sc = [z joint ; z sc ].

  Assuming each brain network is formed by V nodes (brain regions) and D = V (V − 1)/2
number of unique connections (ignoring self-connections). For edge (or connection) ℓ, let XF C [ℓ]
denote its FC connection strength, and [u(ℓ), v(ℓ)] denote its node pair with u(ℓ) < v(ℓ). We
model each edge observation conditionally independent given the latent scores:
                                              D
                                              Y
                                       full
                           pθ (XFC | z fc ) =   pθ (XFC [ℓ] | z full
                                                                fc )
                                                       ℓ=1
                                                       D
                                                       Y
                                 pθ (XSC | z full
                                             sc ) =          pθ (XSC [ℓ] | z full
                                                                             sc ).
                                                       ℓ=1
  1) Functional Connectivity Decoder: In the FC decoder, we model each connection with
a Gaussian likelihood (note that we have applied Fisher z-transformation in the preprocessing
step):
                                                 D
                                                 Y
                            pθ (XFC | z full
                                        fc ) =         N (XFC [ℓ]; µFℓ (z full   2
                                                                          fc ), σF ),
                                                 ℓ=1
where µFℓ (z full                                 2
             fc ) is the mean for ℓ-th edge, and σF is a learnable variance parameter for all edges.

The edge mean µFℓ is a function of z full
                                     fc . We employ a two-stage process to compute it: first, map

the latent vector to node-level representations, and then compute edge predictions from pairwise
node interactions. Specifically, we transform z full
                                                fc into a node-level embedding X
                                                                                 F
                                                                                   ∈ RV ×RF
via a ResNet block. The r-th column X F [·, r] ∈ RV assigns an embedding value to each of
the V brain regions. The edge mean is then computed as a weighted sum of products between
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                 11



node-level embeddings:
                                          RF
                                          X
                            µFℓ = bFℓ +         αrF X F [u(ℓ), r] X F [v(ℓ), r],
                                          r=1
where bFℓ is an edge-specific bias term and αrF ≥ 0 are learned weights.
  With µFℓ and σF , we can easily write down the log-likelihood for FC as:
                             log pθ (XFC | z full
                                             fc )

                              D             1 X
                                                D                                             (2)
                                      2
                           = − log(2πσF ) − 2      (XFC [ℓ] − µFℓ )2 .
                              2            2σF ℓ=1
  2) Structural Connectivity Decoder: The SC data is very different from FC data. In our case,
the SC matrix contains discrete, nonnegative streamline counts, and therefore, we use a Poisson
distribution to characterize the uncertainty:
                                             D
                                             Y
                                      full
                          pθ (XSC | z sc ) =   Poisson(XSC [ℓ]; λSℓ (z full
                                                                       sc )),
                                           ℓ=1
where λℓ (z sc ) is the rate parameter for the Poisson distribution. To model λSℓ , we employ a
       S    full


similar two-stage process to what we do for the FC data. We first transform z full
                                                                              sc into node-level

embeddings X S ∈ RV ×RS through multi-layer perceptrons.
  Each row of X S assigns an embedding vector to each of the V brain regions. Next, λSℓ is
computed from node embeddings with an exponential link to ensure positivity:
                                            RS
                                       S X
                  λSℓ (z full
                         sc   ) = exp  γℓ +    αrS X S [u(ℓ), r] X S [v(ℓ), r] ,
                                                 r=1
where γℓS is an edge-specific bias term and αrS ≥ 0 are learned weights. The exponential function
guarantees that λSℓ > 0, satisfying the Poisson distribution requirement. With λSℓ , we can write
the log-likelihood for SC as:
                            log pθ (XSC | z full
                                            sc )
                                D
                                X                                                             (3)
                                      XSC [ℓ] log λSℓ − λSℓ − log(XSC [ℓ]!) .
                                                                           
                            =
                                ℓ=1


E. Model Training

  The CM-JIVNet is trained by maximizing a variational lower bound on the joint log-likelihood,
augmented with regularization terms that enforce disentanglement. The complete objective is
discussed below, and it balances reconstruction accuracy, distributional regularization, cross-
modal information sharing, and component orthogonality.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                       12



  1) Evidence Lower Bound: We use the evidence lower bound (ELBO) to approximate the
intractable log marginal likelihood log pθ (XFC , XSC ) as follows:
                            log pθ (XFC , XSC )

                           ≥Eqϕ log pθ (XFC | z full                   full
                                                                           
                                                fc ) + log pθ (XSC | z sc )

                                − DKL (qϕ (z | XFC , XSC )∥p(z)),
where p(z) = N (0, I) is the standard Gaussian prior, qϕ (z | XFC , XSC ) is the approximate
posterior produced by the encoders and fusion mechanism. The first term encourages accurate
reconstruction of both modalities, while the second term regularizes the posterior toward the
prior.
  Utilizing the derived conditional log-likelihoods in Equation. 2 and 3, we approximate the
first data term as
                                      Lrecon = λFC LFC + λSC LSC ,
                     hP                       i                   hP                           i
                         D               F 2                         D                 S     S
where LFC = −Eqϕ         ℓ=1 (XFC [ℓ] − µℓ )    and LSC = −Eqϕ       ℓ=1 X SC [ℓ] log λℓ − λ ℓ    , and
λFC , λSC > 0 balance the relative importance of each modality.
  The KL divergence term is decomposed across the model’s two-stage encoding architecture.
First, we regularize the initial encoder distributions:
                              LKL,enc = DKL (qϕ (z̃ full
                                                    fc | XFC )∥p(z̃ fc ))

                                          + DKL (qϕ (z̃ full
                                                        sc | XSC )∥p(z̃ sc )).

Next, we also regularize the disentangled distributions produced by the fusion step:
                          LKL,fusion = DKL (qϕ (z joint | XFC , XSC )∥p(z joint ))

                                       + DKL (qϕ (z ind                  ind
                                                    fc | XFC , XSC )∥p(z fc ))

                                 + DKL (qϕ (z ind                  ind
                                              sc | XFC , XSC )∥p(z sc )).
Both terms have a closed-form formula since the involved distributions are Gaussians.
  2) Additional Regularizations: Beyond the ELBO, we impose two additional constraints to
achieve effective disentanglement in the latent space.
     a) Mutual Information Regularization: To ensure the initial encoders capture joint cross-
modal information before disentanglement, we maximize their mutual information using the
Mutual Information Neural Estimator (MINE) [26]. MINE provides a variational lower bound
on mutual information:
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                    13




                                                                              h                        i
                                                                                   Tψ (z̃ full   full
                                                                                          fc ,z̃ sc )
                 I(z̃ full    full
                                              Tψ (z̃ full    full
                                                               
                      fc ; z̃ sc ) ≥ Ep              fc , z̃ sc )   − log Epprod e                           ,
where Tψ : Rd × Rd → R is a neural network critic parameterized by ψ, p denotes the joint
distribution, and pprod denotes the product of marginals. The estimate Iˆψ (z̃ full    full
                                                                               fc ; z̃ sc ) is obtained

by maximizing this variational objective with respect to the neural critic Tψ . We then define the
loss term as:
                                               LMI = −Iˆψ (z̃ full    full
                                                              fc ; z̃ sc ),

This regularization term encourages the encoders to preserve cross-modal dependencies that will
subsequently be allocated to the joint component.
     b) Orthogonality Constraint: To enforce non-overlapping information in the modality-
specific components, we minimize the orthogonality loss Lortho defined in Eq. (1).
  3) Complete Objective: The final training objective combines all terms:
                   L = Lrecon + LKL,enc + λfusion LKL,fusion + λMI LMI + λortho Lortho                           (4)
where λfusion , λMI , λortho > 0 control the relative importance of fusion regularization, cross-modal
information sharing, and component disentanglement, respectively. This objective enables end-
to-end training of CM-JIVNet while achieving probabilistic decomposition of brain connectivity
into interpretable joint and individual components.
  4) Training Algorithm: Algorithm 1 summarizes the optimization procedure. We briefly de-
scribe the encoder and decoder architectures below.
     a) CNN encoders for FC and SC: We treat each connectome (FC or SC) as a single-channel
68-by-68 image and encode it with a modality-specific CNN. The FC encoder and SC encoder
share the same layer configuration but do not share parameters. Each encoder contains three
Conv–ReLU–MaxPool blocks: the three convolution layers output 32, 64, and 128 channels, and
each 2-by-2 max-pooling step halves the spatial size, so 68 becomes 34, then 17, then 8. The
final 128-by-8-by-8 feature map is flattened into a 8192-dimensional vector and fed into two
linear heads that output a 64-dimensional mean vector and a 64-dimensional log-variance vector.
     b) Attention-based fusion and latent decomposition: The two modality latents are first
projected to a common hidden width (hidden_dim) using modality-specific linear layers,
and then stacked as a two-token sequence. A 3-head self-attention layer exchanges information
between the two tokens, after which a small gating layer (a linear layer to one scalar followed
by a sigmoid) produces one weight per modality to form a weighted fused representation. From
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                    14



this fused representation, three pairs of linear heads predict the mean and log-variance for one
joint latent and two modality-specific latents.
     c) Decoders: For reconstruction, each decoder takes the concatenation of the joint latent
and the corresponding modality-specific latent (two 64-dimensional vectors concatenated).
  To reconstruct FC, we use a convolutional decoder. A linear layer reshapes the concatenated
latent into a 64-by-17-by-17 feature map; we use 17-by-17 so that two successive upsampling
stages (each doubling the resolution) recover exactly 68-by-68. We apply two residual blocks
(each block has two 3-by-3 convolutions with batch normalization and ReLU plus a skip
connection), followed by two transposed-convolution layers that upsample 17 to 34 and then
34 to 68 while reducing channels from 64 to 32 to 16. A final 3-by-3 convolution maps 16
channels to one channel, and a tanh activation produces the reconstructed FC image.
  To reconstruct SC, we use an MLP decoder. The concatenated latent is passed through two
fully connected layers of width hidden_dim with ReLU activations, projected to a 68-by-68
output. A softplus activation is applied at the output to enforce non-negativity, yielding the
reconstructed SC image.


F. Supervised CM-JIVNet

  A central goal in network neuroscience is to decipher the relationship between individual brain
connectivity and behavioral or cognitive phenotypes. For instance, to what extent can SC and FC
patterns jointly predict an individual’s IQ? While the unsupervised CM-JIVNet encodes SC and
FC into latent variables to capture intrinsic data variance, these representations may not fully
encompass the specific features required for behavioral prediction. To address this, we extend
CM-JIVNet into a supervised framework (sCM-JIVNet). This variant allows the encoders to
adapt to the downstream prediction task, extracting latent variables that are not only statistically
representative but also behaviorally relevant. In sCM-JIVNet, we leverage the pretrained encoder
and fusion modules as a robust initialization and add linear regression heads to guide the latent
space toward trait prediction.
                              i       i
  For a given subject’s data XFC and XSC , sCM-JIVNet utilizes the pretrained VAE encoders in
CM-JIVNet to obtain three disentangled latents: µijoint , µind,i     ind,i
                                                           fc , and µsc . These latents are then

concatenated into a vector z icat for trait prediction. We use means rather than sampled latents to
get deterministic predictions and avoid stochasticity during inference.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                           15



Algorithm 1 Training the CM-JIVNet Model
                   i     i
Require: Data {(XFC  , XSC )}N
                             i=1 , batch size m, learning rate η, and hyperparameters

      {λfusion , λMI , λortho , λFC , λSC }.
 1: Randomly initialize model parameters θ and ϕ.

 2: for epoch = 1 to max epochs do

 3:        Shuffle training data and split into batches of size m.
                                  i     i
 4:        for each mini-batch {(XFC , XSC )}m
                                             i=1 do

 5:                    i
               Encode XFC      i
                          and XSC to obtain initial latent variables z̃ ifc , z̃ isc using the reparameter-
      ization trick.
 6:            Apply CM-JIVE attention-based fusion to disentangle into z ijoint , z ind,i  ind,i
                                                                                     fc , z sc .

 7:            Decode using [z ijoint ; z ind,i       i         ind,i                i       i
                                          fc ] and [z joint ; z sc ] to reconstruct XFC and XSC .

 8:            Compute Ltotal using Eq. 4.
 9:            Update θ and ϕ via stochastic gradient-based optimization (Adam) with learning rate
      η.
10:        end for
11: end for

12: return Trained parameters θ and ϕ.

  1) Prediction Heads and Revised Training Objective: For each target trait tk in the trait set
T = {t1 , . . . , tK }, we attach a linear regression head:
                                               yki = β ⊤   i           i
                                                       k z cat + bk + ϵk ,

where β k and bk are learnable parameters, and ϵik captures the prediction error. We use a
composite loss that balances mean squared error and correlation to train the prediction model:
                           XK
                    Lsup =    (λmse MSE(ŷk , yk ) + λcorr (1 − corr(ŷk , yk ))) .
                                     k=1
  2) Two-Stage Fine-Tuning: The sCM-JIVNet’s training proceeds in two stages based on the
pretrained CM-JIVNet:
      a) Stage 1: Initialization: The pretrained encoders and fusion module are frozen, and only
the regression heads {β k , bk }K
                                k=1 are optimized based on Lsup . This initializes the prediction

heads using pretrained CM-JIVNet.
      b) Stage 2: Fine-Tuning.: All model parameters are then unfrozen and jointly optimized
with:
                                                  Ls = Lsup + λL,
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                       16



where λ ≪ 1 applies weak reconstruction regularization to prevent catastrophic forgetting of the
generative structure while allowing the encoders to adapt to the supervised task.

                                        IV. N UMERICAL S TUDY

  We use the HCP-YA dataset introduced in Section II containing 1,065 subjects with paired FC
and SC to study the numerical performance of the proposed CM-JIVNet framework. With these
data, we aim to address the following objectives: (1) validating that CM-JIVNet effectively disen-
tangles joint and modality-specific latent components that capture interpretable brain organization
patterns; (2) demonstrating that CM-JIVNet outperforms existing methods in cross-modality
reconstruction while preserving both individual-level and group-level connectome patterns; and
(3) evaluating whether the learned latent representations can predict behavioral traits and whether
supervision improves predictive performance compared to unsupervised feature extraction.

A. Validating Latent Space Disentanglement

  A key contribution of CM-JIVNet is its ability to decompose the latent representation into
three components: a joint component capturing cross-modal information shared between FC and
SC, and two individual components preserving modality-specific features unique to FC or SC. In
this section, we first examine whether the proposed attention-based fusion successfully achieves
this disentanglement.
  To evaluate orthogonality, we quantify the geometric separation of the three latent subspaces
by computing pairwise angles between latent vectors. For each subject i, CM-JIVNet produces
three latent mean vectors: µijoint ∈ Rdz , µind,i ∈ Rdz , and µind,i
                                                                   sc ∈ Rdz . For each pair of vectors,
                                            fc           
                                                ⟨µa ,µb ⟩
we compute their angle based on arccos ∥µ         ∥∥µ ∥
                                                            . We then aggregate these angles across all
                                                     a    b

subjects, and report the mean and standard deviation.
                                                     TABLE I
      M EAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF PAIRWISE ANGLES BETWEEN MEAN LATENT VECTORS ( IN DEGREES )


                                Pair              Mean Angle (°)   Std. Dev. (°)

                                (µjoint , µind
                                           fc )       88.96            6.33
                                (µjoint , µind
                                           sc )       91.10            6.96
                                (µind   ind
                                  fc , µsc )          89.20            6.96


  Table I shows that the mean angles are close to 90◦ for all three pairs. These near-orthogonal
angles confirm that the learned subspaces capture largely non-overlapping information. The
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                         17



relatively small standard deviations indicate that this orthogonality is consistent across subjects.
This geometric separation validates that our attention-based separation mechanism, combined
with the orthogonality loss, achieves effective disentanglement in the latent space.
   We next visualize the latent space separation using the t-SNE method. We vertically stack the
                                                                                    1:N,ind
three latent components from all subjects into a single matrix Xconcat = [µ1:N
                                                                           joint ; µfc      ; µ1:N,ind
                                                                                               sc      ]∈
R3N ×dz . This row-wise concatenation allows t-SNE to embed every joint and modality-specific
vector into a shared two-dimensional space. As shown in Fig. 2, the representations partition
into distinct manifolds, confirming the model’s ability to successfully disentangle cross-modal
from modality-specific features.




Fig. 2. t-SNE embedding of concatenated latent representations, colored by subspace.

   Next, we quantify edge-wise SC–FC coupling induced by a single axis of the learned joint
latent space. Let {µijoint }N
                            i=1 denote the joint mean embeddings, and let u1 be the first principal

direction obtained by PCA. We perform a conditional joint traversal by varying only the joint
coordinate z joint (t) = µ̄joint + t u1 , while fixing the modality-specific latent variables.
   Decoding yields FC(t) and SC(t) in the original network space. For each edge (i, j), we
measure the endpoint changes ∆FCij ≜ FCij (t+ ) − FCij (t− ) and ∆SCij ≜ log(1 + SCij (t+ )) −
log(1 + SCij (t− )), where (t− , t+ ) correspond to the traversal endpoints where set to ±3σ
along PC1 .As shown in Fig. 3, the vast majority of edges (≈ 87.6%) fall into the {∆FCij >
0, ∆SCij > 0} quadrant, indicating that the dominant joint axis produces increased connections
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                               18




Fig. 3. Edge-level SC-FC coupling induced by a PC1 traversal in the joint latent space. Each point corresponds to one undirected
edge. The horizontal and vertical axes report endpoint changes ∆SCij and ∆FCij , respectively, between the traversal extremes
(e.g., ±3σ along PC1 ). Quadrants categorize coupling signatures: FC ↑ /SC ↑ (concordant increase), FC ↑ /SC ↓ (decoupling),
and the remaining sign combinations. A dominant mass in the FC ↑ /SC ↑ quadrant indicates that the leading joint axis encodes
a coupled mode of variation, while the minority decoupling edges highlight edge-specific departures from monotone SC–FC
co-variation.

in both modalities. A notable subset (≈ 11.9%) exhibits ∆FCij > 0 but ∆SCij < 0, revealing
localized decoupling where structural weakening accompanies functional strengthening. The
remaining quadrants contain negligible edges (< 0.6%). This edge-level view complements
matrix reconstructions by explicitly showing that coupling in the joint space is heterogeneous
rather than uniform.
   To localize where the joint axis acts most strongly, we estimate per-edge rates of change along
PC1 . For each edge, we fit a least-squares line across traversal steps, FCij (t) ≈ aFC    FC
                                                                                     ij + bij t and

log(1 + SCij (t)) ≈ aSC    SC                                       FC         SC
                     ij + bij t, and visualize the slope matrices {bij } and {bij } in Fig. 4.

The FC slope map is broadly positive, consistent with a global functional modulation captured
by PC1 , whereas SC slopes are weaker and spatially heterogeneous, suggesting that structural
variations aligned with the same joint factor are more localized.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                                   19




Fig. 4. Spatial distribution of per-edge change rates along the joint latent PC1 . Each matrix entry is the least-squares slope with
respect to the PC1 coordinate, bFC             SC
                                ij for FC and bij for log(1 + SC).Positive values (red) indicate edges that strengthen as PC1

increases, while negative values (blue) indicate weakening

B. Reconstruction Performance Evaluation

   We next evaluate whether CM-JIVNet can accurately reconstruct FC and SC matrices through
its encoder and decoder and whether it outperforms baseline methods. We compare CM-JIVNet
against several baselines: CNN–MLP, which uses convolutional encoders with multi-layer per-
ceptron decoders; MLP–Attention, which incorporates attention mechanisms into the MLP archi-
tecture; and Graph Auto-Encoding (GATE) [16], a graph-based variational autoencoder designed
for brain network analysis. We assess reconstruction quality using Mean Squared Error (MSE),
Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [27], Fréchet Inception Distance (FID), and Pear-
son correlation. MSE evaluates element-wise reconstruction accuracy, while SSIM measures
structural similarity by accounting for global intensity, contrast, and spatial organization of
connectivity patterns. FID compares the distribution of reconstructed and empirical connectomes
in a feature space rather than at the matrix level; we consider two variants: Spectral FID,
computed from the leading eigenvalues of the normalized graph Laplacian to capture global
topology, and Graph FID, computed from summary graph-theoretic statistics to reflect local and
meso-scale organization. Finally, Pearson correlation quantifies similarity of connectivity patterns
at both the individual-subject and group-average levels.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                20



                                                     TABLE II
 I N - HOUSE BASELINE COMPARISON FOR FC AND SC RECONSTRUCTION ( BOTH MODALITIES AVAILABLE AT INFERENCE ).
                            A LL MODELS USE THE SAME DATA SPLIT AND PREPROCESSING .


                                 FC reconstruction                                  SC reconstruction

Model            MSE↓ SSIM↑ Spectral FID↓ Individual↑ Group↑        MSE↓ SSIM↑ Graph FID↓ Individual↑ Group↑

CM-JIVNet        0.011   0.761     3.420     0.816±0.046    0.993   0.575   0.828     0.226     0.923±0.024    0.999

CNN–MLP          0.022   0.603     8.790     0.666±0.066    0.994   0.587   0.793     0.239     0.918±0.023    0.999

MLP–Attention 0.018      0.644     2.580     0.709±0.066    0.984   0.654   0.817     0.232     0.917±0.024    0.999

GATE             0.037   0.262     74.870    0.714±0.161    0.818   1.576   0.594     6.777     0.857±0.013    0.897


  Both modalities are provided at inference. Table II reports reconstruction performance
when both FC and SC are available at inference. In this joint reconstruction setting, the encoded
representations µjoint , µind       ind
                          fc , and µsc are jointly used to reconstruct both modalities. For FC

reconstruction, CM-JIVNet achieves the lowest MSE and the highest SSIM among all in-house
baselines, indicating improved edge-wise accuracy and structural similarity. CM-JIVNet also
yields the highest individual-level Pearson correlation (0.816 ± 0.046), demonstrating superior
preservation of subject-specific functional connectivity patterns. While MLP–Attention attains a
lower FC Spectral FID, CM-JIVNet substantially improves spectral alignment relative to GATE
(3.42 vs. 74.87), reflecting markedly reduced distributional mismatch in the eigenspectrum. For
SC reconstruction, CM-JIVNet achieves the lowest MSE, the highest SSIM, and the lowest
Graph FID, indicating more faithful recovery of both edge-wise values and topological properties
of structural connectivity. Although MLP–Attention attains slightly lower spectral discrepancy,
CM-JIVNet consistently achieves the highest individual-level Pearson correlation (0.923±0.024),
suggesting superior preservation of subject-specific structural organization beyond global spectral
similarity.
  Only one modality is provided at inference. In clinical settings where only one modality is
available, CM-JIVNet enables the prediction of the missing modality by leveraging the joint latent
component. We evaluated this capacity using edge-wise Pearson correlation between empirical
and predicted FC at both the group and individual levels (Table III). CM-JIVNet achieves a
group-level correlation of 0.990 and an individual-level correlation of 0.712 ± 0.074. To ensure
a fair comparison, our results are grouped by parcellation scale (V ), as the number of nodes
significantly impacts the prediction and evaluation tasks. Within the V ≈ 68 group, our model
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                   21



                                                         TABLE III
    SC→FC PREDICTION PERFORMANCE (P EARSON CORRELATION ) COMPARED WITH PRIOR STUDIES , GROUPED BY
                                                PARCELLATION SCALE (V ).




        Study                     N    Nodes (V )    Approach                         Group       Individual

        Standard Resolution (V ≈ 68)

        Ours (CM-JIVNet)       1,058           68    CNN + attention fusion + MINE    0.990      0.712 ± 0.074

        Li et al. [30]         1,058           68    Graph convolutional net          ≈0.75†          –

        Neudorf et al. [28]     998            66    Graph Nets                        0.94          0.69

        Yang et al. [17]        103            68    Graph autoencoder                 0.96          0.572

        Sarwar et al. [19]      103            68    Multilayer perceptron           0.9 ± 0.1     0.5 ± 0.1

        Medium Resolution (V ≈ 90–100)

        Hong et al. [31]        360            90    Graph convolutional net            –         0.716–0.724

        Benkarim et al. [32]    326           100    Riemannian optimization            –        0.804 ± 0.060

        High Resolution (V = 400)

        Chen et al. [29]        404           400    Graph convolutional net          0.953      0.715 ± 0.052

    †
        Values are reported/approximated as in the referenced survey table.

outperforms recent benchmarks, including Neudorf et al. [28] (0.69) and Yang et al. [17] (0.572).
Furthermore, CM-JIVNet remains competitive with high-resolution models (e.g., Chen et al. [29],
V = 400).
  The high group correlation signifies the successful recovery of dominant group-level con-
nectivity, while the individual-level performance highlights the model’s modality-transforming
ability—specifically, its capacity to extract subject-specific functional information from struc-
tural data. These findings confirm that CM-JIVNet accurately models the structural-functional
interrelationship within the joint latent space, enabling the effective reconstruction of missing
modalities from the available one.


C. Behavioral Trait Prediction

  Linking brain connectivity to behavioral traits is one of the most important tasks in neuro-
science. While the standard CM-JIVNet is excellent at reconstructing brain networks, its latent
variables are not automatically optimized to predict behavior. To address this, we use the super-
vised version, sCM-JIVNet, which fine-tunes the model to extract features that are specifically
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                      22



relevant to cognitive traits. In this section, we evaluate how well these supervised representations
predict various behavioral phenotypes compared to standard unsupervised features.
  We selected seven traits spanning distinct behavioral domains to provide a comprehensive
evaluation: fluid intelligence (FluidInt CR, FluidInt SI), language abilities (OralReading, Pic-
tureVocab), visuospatial reasoning (Visuospatial), and affective/psychiatric measures (AngerAggr,
ChildConduct). For each continuous trait, we performed 5-fold cross-validated Ridge regression,
with the regularization parameter selected via nested cross-validation within each training fold.
Predictive performance is evaluated using the Pearson correlation coefficient between observed
and out-of-fold predicted trait values: r = corr(y, y
                                                    b), where y and y
                                                                    b are vectors of observed
and predicted trait scores across all subjects.
  Fig. 5 compares the prediction performance of the unsupervised and supervised CM-JIVNet
models using the concatenated latent embeddings zicat . While the unsupervised model successfully
captures intrinsic variance for connectome reconstruction, the sCM-JIVNet variant markedly
improves behavioral prediction, achieving an average gain of ∆r ≈ 0.11. The most signifi-
cant improvements are observed in Fluid Intelligence (FluidInt SI: +0.17, FluidInt CR: +0.15)
and Language/Vocabulary (PictureVocab: +0.14). These results suggest that the latent features
required to maximize reconstruction fidelity do not perfectly overlap with those that drive
behavioral phenotypes. This finding aligns with recent literature suggesting that “prediction-
relevant” brain features are often distinct from “reconstruction-relevant” ones, necessitating
supervised objectives to bridge the gap between generative modeling and predictive neuroscience
[16], [18]. By incorporating a supervised loss, the model effectively shifts its latent focus toward
connectivity patterns that are biologically relevant to behavioral outcomes.
  To assess the specific contribution of each latent subspace, we compared four feature con-
figurations: (1) joint latent variables (µjoint ), (2) FC-individual (µind                       ind
                                                                       fc ), (3) SC-individual (µsc ),

and (4) the concatenated set. As shown in Figure 6, the concatenated representation yields the
highest accuracy across all traits, confirming that joint and modality-specific components provide
complementary information. Specifically, FC-individual features demonstrate superior predictive
power for fluid intelligence and affective traits, while SC-individual features perform on par with
or slightly better than FC in language and visuospatial domains. This is consistent with evidence
that functional co-activation patterns are more closely linked to dynamic cognitive processes like
fluid reasoning [33], whereas structural white-matter integrity provides a more stable foundation
for “crystallized” abilities like vocabulary and language syntax [34]. Furthermore, the joint
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                             23




Fig. 5. Comparison of behavioral trait prediction performances between unsupervised and supervised CM-JIVNet models using
concatenated latent representations.

component captures shared SC-FC dependencies, often referred to as “SC-FC coupling”, presents
a fair prediction power with behavior traits, and has been identified as a critical neurobiological
marker for general cognitive ability [35]. These results validate that CM-JIVNet’s disentangled
latent space successfully isolates distinct, biologically meaningful aspects of brain organization.




Fig. 6. Comparison of behavioral trait prediction performance across latent feature configurations. Performance is reported as
the Pearson correlation for joint, functional-individual, structural-individual, and concatenated subspaces.


                                        V. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

   We have presented CM-JIVNet, a novel variational framework that integrates connectivity-
tailored CNN-ResNet architectures with a JIVE-inspired joint–individual decomposition and
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                     24



multi-head attention fusion. By jointly modeling functional and structural connectomes on 1,065
HCP-YA subjects, our framework addresses a critical challenge in multimodal integration: the
ability to disentangle shared cross-modal patterns from modality-specific variations within a
non-linear, generative setting.
  Our experimental results demonstrate that CM-JIVNet significantly outperforms standard gen-
erative baselines, including GATE and MLP-based architectures, across all reconstruction met-
rics. As shown in Table II, the model achieves the lowest MSE and highest SSIM, alongside
substantially reduced spectral and graph FID scores, indicating superior preservation of both
global topology and local graph properties. Furthermore, in the missing-modality scenario (Table
III), CM-JIVNet achieves a state-of-the-art SC→FC group-level correlation of 0.990 and an
individual-level correlation of 0.712, surpassing several recent graph-based and deep learning
approaches in the literature.
  A key contribution of this work is the explicit disentanglement of the latent space. Geometric
analysis (Table I) and t-SNE embeddings (Fig. 2) verify that the joint and modality-specific
subspaces partition into distinct, near-orthogonal manifolds. This separation is functionally mean-
ingful: while the joint subspace captures fundamental organizational principles shared across
modalities, the individual subspaces retain fine-grained details unique to structure or function.
Latent traversal experiments (Figs. 3 and 4) further characterize this interpretability, revealing
that the joint axis encodes a dominant mode of coordinated network strengthening, while simul-
taneously capturing spatially localized structural variations and specific SC–FC decoupling.
  Additionally, our supervised extension, sCM-JIVNet, demonstrates that while unsupervised
representations capture intrinsic data variance, targeted fine-tuning is essential for behavioral
prediction. By incorporating a supervised objective, we achieved significant gains in predicting
cognitive phenotypes, with an average improvement of ∆r ≈ 0.11. The model was particularly
successful in identifying connectivity patterns relevant to fluid intelligence and language abilities
(Figs. 5–6), validating that the disentangled components capture complementary aspects of brain
organization relevant to human behavior.
  Despite these successes, our study has certain limitations. We evaluated the framework on
two modalities within a healthy young adult cohort; future research should test its utility in
clinical populations and incorporate additional modalities, such as EEG or PET. While our
VAE-based approach is highly effective, the integration of emerging generative architectures,
such as diffusion models, may further enhance high-fidelity matrix synthesis. Finally, scaling
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                                25



CM-JIVNet to massive, diverse datasets like the UK Biobank and ABCD study will be critical
to assess its generalizability across the human lifespan and in various disease states.
   In conclusion, CM-JIVNet provides a robust, interpretable, and scalable solution for multi-
modal connectome analysis. By bridging the gap between deep generative modeling and factor-
ized latent representations, this framework offers a powerful tool for uncovering the neural basis
of cognition and developing clinically relevant biomarkers for brain disorders.


                                                      R EFERENCES

 [1] S. G. Mueller, M. W. Weiner, L. J. Thal, R. C. Petersen, C. R. Jack, W. Jagust et al., “Ways toward an early diagnosis
     in Alzheimer’s disease: The Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI),” Alzheimer’s & Dementia, vol. 1, no. 1,
     pp. 55–66, 2005.
 [2] C. J. Honey, O. Sporns, L. Cammoun, X. Gigandet, J.-P. Thiran, R. Meuli, and P. Hagmann, “Predicting human resting-
     state functional connectivity from structural connectivity,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
     States of America, vol. 106, no. 6, pp. 2035–2040, 2009.
 [3] V. D. Calhoun and J. Sui, “Multimodal fusion of brain imaging data: A key to finding the missing link(s) in complex
     mental illness,” Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 230–244, 2016.
 [4] M. A. Koch, D. G. Norris, and M. Hund-Georgiadis, “An investigation of functional and anatomical connectivity using
     magnetic resonance imaging,” NeuroImage, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 241–250, 2002.
 [5] M. D. Greicius, K. Supekar, V. Menon, and R. F. Dougherty, “Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural
     connectivity in the default mode network,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 72–78, 2009.
 [6] L. E. Suárez, R. D. Markello, R. F. Betzel, and B. Misic, “Linking structure and function in macroscale brain networks,”
     Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 302–315, 2020.
 [7] G. Deco, A. Ponce-Alvarez, D. Mantini, G. L. Romani, P. Hagmann, and M. Corbetta, “How local excitation-inhibition
     ratio impacts the whole brain dynamics,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 34, no. 23, pp. 7886–7898, 2014.
 [8] J. Goñi, M. P. van den Heuvel, A. Avena-Koenigsberger, N. V. de Mendizabal, R. F. Betzel, A. Griffa, P. Hagmann, M. Cor-
     betta, and O. Sporns, “Resting-brain functional connectivity predicted by analytic measures of network communication,”
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 833–838, 2014.
 [9] A. Messé, D. Rudrauf, H. Benali, and G. Marrelec, “Relating structure and function in the human brain: Relative
     contributions of anatomy, stationary dynamics, and non-stationarities,” PLoS Computational Biology, vol. 10, no. 3, p.
     e1003530, 2014.
[10] P. Wang, R. Kong, X. Kong, R. Liégeois, C. Orban, G. Deco, M. P. van den Heuvel, and B. T. T. Yeo, “Inversion of a
     large-scale circuit model reveals a cortical hierarchy in the dynamic resting human brain,” Science Advances, vol. 5, no. 1,
     p. eaat7854, 2019.
[11] J. L. Popp, J. A. Thiele, J. Faskowitz, C. Seguin, O. Sporns, and K. Hilger, “Structural-functional brain network coupling
     predicts human cognitive ability,” NeuroImage, vol. 290, p. 120563, Apr. 2024.
[12] A. Ackerman, Z. Zhang, J. Hannig, J. Prothero, and J. S. Marron, “Multi-faceted neuroimaging data integration via analysis
     of subspaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16791, Aug. 2024.
[13] E. F. Lock, K. A. Hoadley, J. S. Marron, and A. B. Nobel, “Joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) for integrated
     analysis of multiple data types,” The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 523–542, 2013.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                                26



[14] R. J. Murden, Z. Zhang, Y. Guo, and B. B. Risk, “Interpretive JIVE: Connections with CCA and an application to brain
     connectivity,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 16, p. 969510, Oct. 2022.
[15] G. Zhou, A. Cichocki, Y. Zhang, and D. P. Mandic, “Group component analysis for multiblock data: common and individual
     feature extraction,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 2426–2439, 2016.
[16] M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and D. B. Dunson, “Graph auto-encoding brain networks with applications to analyzing large-scale
     brain imaging datasets,” NeuroImage, vol. 245, p. 118750, 2021.
[17] H. Yang, S. Winter, Z. Zhang, and D. B. Dunson, “Interpretable AI for relating brain structural and functional connectomes,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05672, Oct. 2022.
[18] Y. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and D. B. Dunson, “Motion-invariant variational autoencoding of brain structural connectomes,”
     Imaging Neuroscience, vol. 2, pp. imag–2–00 303, 2024.
[19] T. Sarwar, Y. Tian, B. T. T. Yeo, K. Ramamohanarao, and A. Zalesky, “Structure-function coupling in the human
     connectome: A machine learning approach,” NeuroImage, vol. 226, p. 117609, 2021.
[20] D. C. Van Essen, S. M. Smith, D. M. Barch, T. E. J. Behrens, E. Yacoub, K. Ugurbil, and the WU-Minn Human Connectome
     Project Consortium, “The WU-Minn human connectome project: An overview,” NeuroImage, vol. 80, pp. 62–79, 2013.
[21] Z. Zhang, M. Descoteaux, J. Zhang, G. Girard, M. Chamberland, D. B. Dunson, A. Srivastava, and H. Zhu, “Mapping
     population-based structural connectomes,” NeuroImage, vol. 172, pp. 130–145, 2018.
[22] D. C. Van Essen, K. Ugurbil, E. Auerbach, D. Barch, T. E. J. Behrens, R. Bucholz, A. Chang, L. Chen, M. Corbetta, S. W.
     Curtiss, S. Della Penna et al., “The human connectome project: A data acquisition perspective,” NeuroImage, vol. 62,
     no. 4, pp. 2222–2231, 2012.
[23] K. H. Maier-Hein, P. F. Neher, J.-C. Houde, M.-A. Côté, E. Garyfallidis, J. Zhong, M. Chamberland, F.-C. Yeh, Y.-C. Lin,
     Q. Ji et al., “The challenge of mapping the human connectome based on diffusion tractography,” Nature Communications,
     vol. 8, no. 1, p. 1349, 2017.
[24] R. S. Desikan, F. Ségonne, B. Fischl, B. T. Quinn, B. C. Dickerson, D. Blacker, R. L. Buckner, A. M. Dale, R. P. Maguire,
     B. T. Hyman, M. S. Albert, and R. J. Killiany, “An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex
     on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest,” NeuroImage, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 968–980, 2006.
[25] Y. Zhao, C. Chang, J. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “Genetic underpinnings of brain structural connectome for young adults,”
     Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 118, no. 543, pp. 1473–1487, 2023.
[26] M. I. Belghazi, A. Baratin, S. Rajeswar, S. Ozair, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and R. D. Hjelm, “Mutual information neural
     estimation,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), ser. Proceedings of Machine
     Learning Research, vol. 80.     PMLR, 2018, pp. 531–540.
[27] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: From error visibility to structural
     similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.
[28] J. Neudorf, S. Kress, and R. Borowsky, “Structure can predict function in the human brain: A graph neural network deep
     learning model of functional connectivity and centrality based on structural connectivity,” Brain Structure and Function,
     vol. 227, no. 1, pp. 331–343, 2022.
[29] P. Chen, J. Ye, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, and A. Zalesky, “Group-common and individual-specific effects of structure-function
     coupling in human brain networks with graph neural networks,” bioRxiv, 2023.
[30] Y. Li, R. Shafipour, G. Mateos, and Z. Zhang, “Mapping brain structural connectivities to functional networks via
     graph encode-decoder with interpretable latent embeddings,” in 2019 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information
     Processing (GlobalSIP), 2019, pp. 1–5.
[31] S. J. Hong et al., “Structural and functional connectome relationships in early childhood,” Developmental Cognitive
     Neuroscience, vol. 64, p. 101314, 2023.
ARXIV PREPRINT                                                                                                              27



[32] O. Benkarim, F. Váša, M. G. Preti, and D. Van De Ville, “A riemannian approach to predicting brain function from the
     structural connectome,” NeuroImage, vol. 257, p. 119299, 2022.
[33] E. Dhamala, K. W. Jamison, A. Jaywant, S. Dennis, and A. Kuceyeski, “Distinct functional and structural connections
     predict crystallised and fluid cognition in healthy adults,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 3102–3118, 2021.
[34] S. M. Sánchez, H. Schmidt, G. Gallardo, A. Anwander, J. Brauer, A. D. Friederici, and T. R. Knösche, “White matter brain
     structure predicts language performance and learning success,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 1445–1455,
     2023.
[35] P. Fotiadis, L. Parkes, K. A. Davis, T. D. Satterthwaite, R. T. Shinohara, and D. S. Bassett, “Structure–function coupling
     in macroscale human brain networks,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 688–704, 2024.
