                                            TVB C++: A Fast and Flexible Back-End for The
                                            Virtual Brain
                                            Ignacio Martı́n1 , Gorka Zamora-López2 , Jan Fousek3 , Michael Schirner4 , Petra Ritter4 ,
                                            Viktor Jirsa3 , Gustavo Deco2,5 , and Gustavo Patow1,2,*
                                            1 ViRVIG, Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain
                                            2 Center for Brain and Cognition, Computational Neuroscience Group, Department of Information and

                                            Communication Technologies, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain
                                            3 Institut de Neurosciences des Systèmes, Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France
arXiv:2405.18788v2 [q-bio.NC] 25 Jun 2024




                                            4 Berlin Institute of Health, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany
                                            5 Institució Catalana de la Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain
                                            * e-mail: gustavo.patow@udg.edu



                                            ABSTRACT

                                             This paper introduces TVB C++, a streamlined and fast C++ Back-End for The Virtual Brain (TVB), a renowned platform and a
                                             benchmark tool for full-brain simulation. TVB C++ is engineered with speed as a primary focus while retaining the flexibility
                                             and ease of use characteristic of the original TVB platform. Positioned as a complementary tool, TVB serves as a prototyping
                                             platform, whereas TVB C++ becomes indispensable when performance is paramount, particularly for large-scale simulations
                                             and leveraging advanced computation facilities like supercomputers. Developed as a TVB-compatible Back-End, TVB C++
                                             seamlessly integrates with the original TVB implementation, facilitating effortless usage. Users can easily configure TVB C++
                                             to execute the same code as in TVB but with enhanced performance and parallelism capabilities.



                                            1 Introduction
                                            In recent years, technological advancements in noninvasive neuroimaging have opened unprecedented windows into the inner
                                            workings of the human brain. Techniques such as EEG, MEG, fMRI, and PET have revolutionized our understanding of
                                            perception, cognition, and behavior, enabling detailed analyses from the microscopic to the macroscopic scale.
                                                Within this landscape, computational tools have played a pivotal role in unraveling the complexities of neural dynamics.
                                            While various frameworks exist, including those focusing on microscopic neuron models1–5 or mesoscopic systems6, 7 , the
                                            emphasis on whole-brain modeling has led to the emergence of platforms like The Virtual Brain (TVB)8–13 . TVB has garnered
                                            widespread recognition for its ability to simulate, analyze, and infer neurophysiological mechanisms across different brain
                                            scales.
                                                Despite its great versatility, TVB faces a competitive challenge in terms of computational speed when compared to other
                                            simulation platforms, especially when dealing with extensive networks or large-scale simulations. Several approaches have
                                            been proposed in recent years to boost the performance of TVB, e.g., by porting specific models into the C-language [CITE] or
                                            interfacing with CUDA [CITE]. However, these attempts lacked the flexibility of TVB because they were restricted to specific
                                            scientific questions they wanted to address, without resulting in a general setting with the flexibility TVB has.
                                                Here, we introduce TVB C++, a groundbreaking addition to the TVB family aimed at addressing these limitations
                                            simultaneously. Developed upon the powerful C++ programming language and the advanced Eigen numeric library14 , TVB
                                            C++ offers great computational performance without compromising on flexibility or ease of use. Unlike previous efforts
                                            —focused solely on performance—TVB C++ takes a holistic approach by retaining the same structure of the original TVB
                                            platform. This allows for TVB C++ to seamlessly integrate with TVB through Python bindings and, therefore, effortlessly
                                            complement existing workflows, offering a swift and efficient backend solution for bulk simulations where computational
                                            time is critical. With TVB C++, researchers gain access to a cutting-edge tool that empowers them to explore the intricacies
                                            of large-scale brain dynamics or conduct extensive parameter explorations, TVB C++ stands ready to help advance the field,
                                            offering unprecedented speed, performance, and versatility.
                                                The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of existing computational tools to simulate neural and
                                            brain activity at different scales. In Section 3 we present the original TVB implementation, its purpose, and general structure,
                                            and in Section 4 we present TVB C++ in detail, with all its input data formats, code structures, models, observables, and, finally,
                                            its Python bindings. In Section 5 we present some use cases for TVB C++, along with the respective results obtained, and
finally we summarize the impact and possibilities of TVB C++ in Section 6.

2 Background
In recent decades, advances in neuroimaging have facilitated unprecedented levels of analysis across various scales, ranging
from the microscopic realm, which entails simulating the complex interplay among ionic channels, neurotransmitters, receptors,
and action potentials, to the macroscopic scale encompassing whole-brain simulations.
    Comprehensive investigations enable the mechanistic comprehension of population dynamics, contributing to the elucidation
of complex structures such as Resting State Networks15–17 , cognition18, 19 , and pathologies like Epilepsy20, 21 , Stroke22–24 ,
or Alzheimer’s Disease25, 26 . It is within the realm of whole-brain simulations that true integration occurs, leading to the
emergence of cognition. Consequently, these models offer a panoramic view of neuronal dynamics at the global macroscopic
level. Computational tools have evolved to simulate all these effects, both at the algorithmic and at the computational power
levels. This has enabled the simulation of large neuronal models that, in turn, enabled accurate predictions illuminating
both theoretical and clinical aspects of our brains. Among the different software frameworks developed to this end, we can
distinguish three big groups:

    • Class I, or microscopic-level simulators, which aim at simulating the activity of individual neurons with high detail, such
      as NEST1 , Brian2 , NetPyNE3 , and NEURON4, 5 . These frameworks have proven particularly useful for simulating large
      networks of spiking neurons. In particular, NEST and Brian had their main target on point neurons, while NetPyNE and
      NEURON focused primarily on morphologically extended neurons. These frameworks are usually used to simulate and
      predict the behavior of large networks of neurons, from which neural mass models are often derived.

    • Class II, or mesoscopic-level simulators, intends to simulate networks of interconnected neurons to simulate microscopic
      and mesoscopic neural circuits such as the internals of subcortical ganglia or cortical columns. There are other frameworks
      created with the specific objective of simulating mesoscopic systems, such as NENGO6 , focusing on applications in
      cognitive science, or Brain Modeling Toolkit7 , focusing on multiscale neural population circuits. Despite their obvious
      and many advantages, these software frameworks are most specifically designed for whole-brain modeling, so they are
      rarely used in this context given the difficult process of calibrating the models.

    • Class III, or whole-brain simulators, aims at simulating whole-brain network activity at the resolution of interconnected
      brain regions. The main ingredients of these models are that a neural population model simulates each brain region
      (ROI), typically interconnected via the white matter fibers as captured by tract tracing or tractography based on diffusion
      imaging. One of the first and main open platforms for this endeavor is The Virtual Brain (TVB)1 , which, since its
      inception, has gained wide recognition as the main platform for full-brain simulations, being a key element in the world’s
      first clinical trial on predictive brain modeling in epilepsy surgery8, 9 . Other options are PyRates27 , and neurolib28 , which
      have been successfully applied to simulate a few use cases.

    The Virtual Brain is the most extended and popular framework for Class III whole-brain modeling. It is, in essence, a
neuroinformatics platform with a brain simulator that incorporates a range of neuronal models and dynamics at its core. It
seamlessly integrates computational modeling and multimodal neuroimaging tools8, 9 , allowing the model-based simulation,
analysis, and inference of neurophysiological mechanisms over several brain scales that underlie the generation of macroscopic
neuroimaging signals. With TVB, creating personalized virtual brains is possible10, 29 , as well as studying the intricate multi-
scale neural mechanisms within the brain30 . The most recent advances in TVB include its integration with cloud services
through the European platform EBRAINS11 .
    However, the original TVB implementation —which we will refer to as TVB-Python in the following— has in computational
speed its biggest drawback. To overcome slow execution speeds, two different strategies have been implemented. The first
one, TVB-HPC212 , automatically produces high-performance codes for CPUs and GPUs using an easy XML-based language
called RateML for model specification. RateML is based on the domain-independent language LEMS31 , which allows for the
declarative description of computational models using a simple XML syntax. The already existing example implementations
can be easily adapted to test different models, without requiring any knowledge about algorithmic optimization. The second
one, Fast_TVB (first used in30 ), is a specialized high-performance implementation of the "Reduced Wong Wang" model32
written in C. It makes use of several optimization strategies and a sparse memory layout to efficiently use CPU resources, which
makes it possible to simulate extremely large models with millions of nodes even on a standard computer in a reasonable time.
Aquilué-Llorens et al.33 presented a CPU-based version of the TVB-AdEx model34, 35 , used to study mechanisms underlying
the emergence of conscious- and unconscious-like brain state dynamics using an MPI multi-node CPU setup. More recently,13
  1 https://www.thevirtualbrain.org/
  2 https://wiki.ebrains.eu/bin/view/Collabs/rateml-tvb




                                                                                                                                 2/25
presented the TVB-HPC framework, a modular set of methods used here to specifically implement the TVB-AdEx model for
GPU and analyze emergent dynamics, accelerating simulations and thus reducing computational resource requirements, which
in turn enabled larger parameter-space explorations.
    However, despite its broad acceptance as the reference platform for whole-brain simulations, it still exhibits some limitations
when it comes to very large brain simulations, mainly in terms of its speed. For instance, a simulation with a parcellation with
around 400 ROIs using the Balanced Excitation-Inhibition (BEI) model32 using BOLD signals of around 10-minute recordings
(approximately XX temporal samples, or volumes) takes around 5 minutes in a high-end processor. Suppose this evaluation is
inserted into a fitting procedure where hundreds of evaluations take place. In that case, the total time for a single experiment on
a single subject may rise to 1 week, which can become a serious problem even if using powerful parallel supercomputers.


3 TVB Python
The Virtual Brain (TVB) stands as a neuroinformatics software platform designed for whole-brain network simulations,
leveraging biologically realistic connectivity to facilitate model-based inference of neurophysiological mechanisms across
diverse brain scales. See Figure 1. Through the incorporation of such connectivity, TVB enables the generation of macroscopic
neuroimaging signals, including functional MRI (fMRI), EEG, and MEG, as depicted in Figure 1. By harnessing individual
subject data, TVB empowers the reproduction and assessment of personalized brain configurations. This personalized approach
fosters exploration into the ramifications of pathological alterations within the system, thereby facilitating investigations into
potential strategies to mitigate adverse processes. Within TVB, a biologically plausible, large-scale connectivity of brain
regions is integrated. This connectivity is mediated through long-range neural fiber tracts identified via tractography-based
methods. One differential trait of TVB and TVB C++, is their capability to handle connectivity both at the strength level,
and also the time-delays associated to fiber lengths. In practice, the implementation for weights and tract lengths entails full
matrices without any inherent symmetry constraints.
    From a high-level perspective, the architecture of TVB, as illustrated in Figure 2, accommodates interaction through various
interfaces tailored to specific user needs and deployment scenarios. Structurally, TVB comprises two primary components:
the backend, referred to as the "scientific computing core," and the supporting framework, which includes the graphical user
interface and data visualization tools. TVB relies on an efficient and resilient storage data system to manage both metadata
information and the underlying data. Functionally, TVB backends are designed to seamlessly support various interfaces,
ensuring consistent functionality regardless of the selected interface.
    In essence, a TVB application defines the logic necessary for data input, processing based on configurable parameters,
and visualization of results. In the original Python implementation of TVB, while a single simulation step may not be readily
distributable across multiple processing threads, each simulation step can be computed independently in different threads,
potentially across distinct nodes. TVB documentation advises the deployment of complex simulation tasks on clusters to
mitigate computational expenses.
    As previously mentioned, TVB-Datatypes serve as a middleware layer facilitating the management and flow of data between
the scientific kernel and the supporting framework. Essentially, TVB-Datatypes are annotated data structures encompassing one
or more data attributes alongside associated descriptive information, inclusive of requisite methods for data manipulation.
    The simulation core, the final module in our delineation, utilizes structural connectivity information within a comprehensive
model of neural dynamics across the entire brain. Here, users can delineate the spatial structure upon which the model operates,
as well as the hierarchical connections between nodes through the structural connectivity framework. Subsequently, the system
numerically integrates the resultant coupled system of differential equations to replicate emergent brain dynamics. Central to
this process, the Simulator class serves as both a repository for all pertinent information and as the conductor orchestrating the
various steps associated with the simulation, all transparently to the user.


4 TVB C++
In response to the constrained performance of TVB Python, particularly evident when handling extensive networks or
simulations necessitating extensive parameter exploration, TVB C++ emerges as a simulator tailored for whole-brain network
models (BNMs).
    Reproducing the functionality of TVB-Python, TVB C++ can simulate neural population models coupled by structural
connectivity, which is an aggregated representation of the brain’s white matter axon fiber bundle network. In addition to being
implemented as a C++ library, TVB C++ offers Python bindings to seamlessly plug it into existing pipelines, and subsequently
serve as a fully integrated TVB Back-End. This way, by simply configuring the TVB simulator to use TVB C++ instead of
the default implementation in Python, existing code can be used without changes. The general architecture of TVB C++ as a
back-end for TVB is illustrated in Figure 3.


                                                                                                                              3/25
    The architecture of TVB C++ centers on two distinct interfaces tailored to user interaction. Currently, the console interface
operates independently of the storage layer, storing results solely in memory. Consequently, users utilizing the console interface
must manually oversee data import and export operations. On the other hand, its back-end comprises blocks that seamlessly
interface with various top application layers. The data types serve as the common language between different components such
as analyzers, visualizers, simulators, and uploaders. These datatypes embody "active data," signifying that when TVB C++ is
configured with a database, instances encapsulating data types are automatically retained.
    In the following subsections, we will introduce the main TVB C++ components, namely its inputs, code structure, whole-
brain models, integrators, history, coupling, and monitors. All these components represent functional modules that are
completely user-configurable (see Section 3), allowing the users to interact with them to tailor their simulation and analysis
needs.

4.1 Inputs
In general, TVB C++ can load brain model data from a variety of sources and formats, with easy expandability to new formats
and registration modalities. One of the main inputs for brain data consists of a structural connectome SC (in our case, weights
files) and a parameter set (parameter file), plus spontaneous blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) as stored in functional
MRI data (fMRI), together with some regional information that depends on the problem at hand, from neuroreceptor data to
gene expressions. Optionally, the user can provide information about the lengths of the tracts between the nodes, which would
introduce delays in the communications between the regions. This is also considered in the TVB C++ implementation.

4.1.1 Data formats
While TVB allows loading data from Matlab data files (MAT), our version uses the Numpy (NPZ) format. We provide a Python
script to convert MAT files into NPZ files.

4.2 Code structure
TVB C++ replicates the same structure of the original TVB library. That means that the structure of the classes is the same,
providing the same functionality and flexibility. However, TVB C++ only focuses on the simulation part of the original TVB,
and it does not provide any user interface. The two main parts of the library are the simulator module modulename.py, consisting
of the population models to simulate the activity of one brain region, e.g., mean-field AdEx, Wong-Wang, FRE; coupling, which
can be either dense or sparse; the integrator, where the different integration schemes are implemented; the monitors, including
raw data monitor and the temporal averaging monitor, as well as a convolution-based BOLD; the noise implementation; the
BOLD conversion system based on the Ballon-Windkessel model; and the simulator module itself, in charge of wrapping all
the other components in a single, uniform shell. On the other hand, the other big module, the tools, is composed of a series of
submodules, being the observables, e.g., FC, FCD, and the Phase Interaction Matrices a few examples, as well as the interfaces
with numpy and Scipy. See Figure 4.
    While TVB is heavily based on NumPy, no version of this library exists in C++. To provide similar functionality we have
chosen the Eigen library14 , specifically version 3.9 since it provides advanced matrix indexing similar to NumPy. Moreover,
Eigen takes advantage of SIMD instruction sets, and it can be combined with BLAS/LAPACK, Intel MKL library, and CUDA.
    All the objects that can be configured in a simulation are:

    • Whole-Brain Models

    • Integrators

    • History

    • Coupling

    • Monitors

4.3 Population and mean-field models of regional activity
TVB C++ has a modular design that allows the incorporation of a large variety of whole-brain models. Model definitions are
very similar to TVB, and with TVB C++ this implies deriving from the abstract class tvb::Model. The main method to
implement is tvb::Model::operator() (equivalent to the dfun() method in TVB) that computes the derivatives of
the state variables.
    Currently, several methods have been implemented and tested, namely, the Balanced Excitation-Inhibition (BEI) model by
Deco et al.32 , the Montbrió, Pazó and Roxin’s FRE model36, 37 , and the mean-field AdEx34, 38–40 . See Section 5.


                                                                                                                             4/25
4.4 Numerical integrators
TVB allows the use of different integrators to compute simulations with the same model. TVB C++ follows the same approach
and provides an abstract class Integrator that can be derived and this way implements different integration strategies. Right
now we provide the Euler deterministic and stochastic (Euler-Maruyama) integrators. In this latter case, stochastic integrators
can be combined with different noise generators, in the same way, that TVB does.

4.5 History and time-delays
TVB takes into account the delay in signal transmission between nodes of the brain model. The delays are computed from the
tract length matrix and the signal speed. TVB C++ also keeps track of the signal history and provides two modes: a dense
history that keeps track of all signals at all possible delays, and a no-delay history, which is more efficient and can be used in
some models.

4.6 Coupling
The coupling functions allow activity (state variables) that have been propagated over the long-range connectivity to pass
through these functions before entering the equations (tvb::Model::operator()) describing the local dynamics.
    At the moment, only linear coupling is implemented, but other functions are straightforward to use.

4.7 Monitors
Another feature of TVB is the Monitors, objects that record significant values from the simulation. In their simplest form, they
return all the simulated data, subsampled data, spatially averaged temporally subsampled, or temporally averaged subsamples.
The current version of TVB C++ implements the two former ones.
    TVB also has more elaborate monitors that instantiate a physically realistic measurement process on the simulation, such as
EEG, MEG, and fMRI (BOLD). In TVB C++ we follow a slightly different approach and these measurement processes are
performed after the simulation, using the monitor data as input.

4.8 Extra tools
To make TVB C++ a useful tool, the ability to simulate Whole-Brain models is just the first step. There are many extra
tools needed to analyze the results of such simulations. TVB C++ provides some of these tools, and provides an example
implementing all the necessary steps to reproduce the main results of the corresponding models enumerated above and described
in Section 5: The BEI model32 , the FRE model36, 37 and the mean-field AdEx model34, 38–40 . We have chosen this work since it
allows us to compare standard features already existing in TVB and high-performance implementations. To reproduce these
works, some steps need to be taken:

    • Perform simulations using the corresponding model

    • Estimate the BOLD signal from the simulated physiological signals.

    • Compute some sort of observable, e.g., sliding-window correlations, from the obtained BOLD signals. See Section 4.8.2.

    • Use a measure, e.g., the L2 metric, between the empirical and simulated observables obtained.

    For the last two items, we had to implement some of the features of NumPy and SciPy into TVB C++, like the Kolmogorov
statistic.

4.8.1 Estimate BOLD signals from neural output
Once we have obtained the simulated mean field activity, we need to transform it into a Blood Oxygenation Level Dependent
(BOLD) signal. Given that the conversion from electrical activity to a BOLD signal is, in its mathematical sense, a low-pass filter,
this process can be computed in two different ways: as a convolution with Volterra kernels, or as a generalized hemodynamic
model such as the Balloon-Windkessel model. In the following, we describe both implementations, as TVB C++ implements
the two methods to create a BOLD signal from a raw signal produced by the simulation, as the original TVB implementation
also does.
Haemodynamic Response Function Model One option is to use convolutions with Hemodynamic Response Function
(HRF) to compute the output BOLD signal, derived using generic techniques from nonlinear system identification41–45 . The
approach employed allows for the estimation of Volterra kernels, which elucidate the relationship between stimulus presentation
and consequent hemodynamic responses. This technique represents the BOLD signal as the outcome of a convolution with
a Volterra series46 , which are, essentially, Taylor expansions extended to encompass dynamical input-state-output systems
and consider the impact of the input at all times in the recent past42 . As a result, they are regarded as model-independent,


                                                                                                                               5/25
capable of representing any such dynamical system. Serving as high-order extensions of linear convolution or "smoothing,"
Volterra kernels provide a nonlinear characterization of the hemodynamic response function. Consequently, they facilitate the
modeling of responses to stimuli across various contexts (e.g., different rates of word presentation) and interactions among
stimuli. In TVB C++ this is implemented as a special case of a Monitor class, which are tools to record significant values
from the simulation, in this case using HRF kernels. As we are following TVB’s main implementation, we are also using the
first-order Volterra kernel, too.
Balloon-Windkessel Model:         We implemented the generalized hemodynamic model of Stephan et al.47, 48 . We compute
the BOLD signal in the k-th brain area from the firing rate of the excitatory pools H (E) , such that an increase in the firing
rate causes an increase in a vasodilatory signal, sk , that is subject to auto-regulatory feedback. Blood inflow fk responds in
proportion to this signal inducing changes in blood volume vk and deoxyhemoglobin content qk . The equations relating to these
biophysical variables are:

        dsk         (E)
             = 0.5rk + 3 − ksk − γ( fk − 1)
         dt
        d fk
             = sk
         dt
        dvk             −1
                                                                                                                               (1)
      τ      = fk − vαk
         dt
                               −1          −1
        dqk       1 − (1 − ρ) fk       vαk
      τ      = fk                 − qk
         dt               ρ              vk
with finally
                                                    
                                    qk
      Bk = v0 k1 (1 − qk ) + k2 (1 − ) + k3 (1 − vk )
                                    vk
being the final measured BOLD signal.
    We used the updated version49 described later, which consists of introducing the change of variables ẑ = lnz, which induces
the following change for z = fk , vk and qk , with its corresponding state equation dz
                                                                                    dt = F(z), as:

      d ẑ d ln(z) dz F(z)
          =          =
      dt     dz dt     z
which results in z(t) = exp(ẑ(t)) always being positive, which guarantees proper support for these non-negative states, and thus
numerical stability when evaluating the state equations during evaluation.
4.8.2 Observables
Functional Connectivity:    It is computed as the Pearson correlation between the model and empirical estimates of static (i.e.,
time-averaged) Functional Connectivity, estimated across all pairs of brain regions (FC); more specifically, the correlation
between the values in the upper triangles of the model and empirical FC matrices.
Sliding-Window Functional Connectivity Dynamics (swFCD):               In50 , to take into account the spatiotemporal fluctuations
in functional brain dynamics over time, the model is fitted to the spatiotemporal dynamics of the data (i.e., to the Functional
Connectivity Dynamics [FCD])16, 17, 51 . The measure used is a sliding-window correlation between BOLD signals. To implement
this, TVB C++ re-implements some functions from NumPy and SciPy.
Phase Functional Connectivity Dynamics (phFCD):            From each BOLD time series of each ROI, we can Hilbert-transform
them to yield the phase evolution of the regional signals, which can be averaged, to finally be used to compute the KS distance
from other identically processed series. This yields the Phase Functional Connectivity Dynamics (phFCD), which is a 3D matrix
of N × N × T -size, where N is the number of nodes in the parcellation used and T indicates the number of image volumes
acquired in all considered sessions.

4.9 Python bindings
Compiling and executing C++ code can be challenging to most neuroscientists who are more used to user-friendly interfaces.
To provide an easy entry point to use the power of TVB C++, we have developed a Python package that provides easy access
to the features of this library. This package provides bindings for the different library components, allowing the selection of
different models (e.g., FRE, Dynamic Mean Field, mean-field AdEx), different monitors (e.g., two different BOLD monitors),


                                                                                                                             6/25
integrators (e.g., Euler or Euler-Maruyama) and observables (e.g., FC, swFCD, phFCD). The API supports interaction with the
original TVB simulator python class so that it can be used as an alternative Back-End without the need for code adaptation.

   The library is hosted in a Github public repository52 and there is a folder that contains the Python binding including a
Jupyter notebook3 that makes it easier to test the library. The API as of now is straightforward and it allows to select of different
neural population models, monitors, integrators, and observables, following the protocols and standards of the original TVB
implementation, thus allowing for seamless integration as a backend for TVB-python.

    In Listing 1, a comprehensive example of TVB C++ Python bindings is provided. It is essential to note that the TVB
C++ module operates as a state machine, requiring the configuration of all state variables before execution, starting with the
integration variables and loading the structural connectivity matrix (lines 6-14). Subsequently, a neuronal mass model, FRE
model with 6 state variables, is configured, with noise added only to the last two via the Euler-Maruyama (referred to as
EulerStochastic) integrator (lines 16-21). The initial state of the model’s variables is set to zero (lines 22-25), followed by the
configuration of global coupling (line 27). While the current implementation only offers linear coupling, the library is designed
for easy extension. Users can query model parameters before execution by utilizing the get_model_parameters()
command (line 29), and change them before execution. An example of this can be seen below, in Section 5.3, where an example
of a change of some complex model parameters is presented.

    A monitor is then added to process the raw simulation data, averaging over 1 ms of state variable 0 (line 32). Finally, the
simulation is run with the run_sim command, specifying the time interval in milliseconds (line 34). The simulation output
comprises a list of monitor results, with each result being a tuple containing two arrays: a 1D array with time samples and a 2D
array with simulation output data, such as time-series data.

    To convert the simulation output to a BOLD signal, three methods are available: Stephan2007, Stephan2007b, and
the original TVB convolution-based monitor (lines 41-43). Users can select their desired monitor by changing the appropriate
keyword.

   Finally, the resulting signal is subsampled for illustrative purposes, and the results can be plotted using the code snippet
provided in Listing 2.




5 Use cases

In this section we provide practical use cases implemented within TVB C++. First, we present a modified version of the
Balanced Excitation-Inhibition model32 , followed by the implementation of the Mean Field Adaptive Integrate and Fire Neurons
(mean-field AdEx) in its first order35 and second order34 variants. Finally, the FRE model36, 37 is described.

    We have tested the TVB C++ version against TVB-Python version 2.8.1, the FAST_TVB implementation, and RateML. The
comparison involves two main tasks, the ones involving whole-brain simulations using a neural model, and other computations
that use mainly external functions, like BOLD signal generation. It must be taken into account that FAST_TVB only offers
a reduced set of the full TVB functionality, so we only compared the functionality that was possible for us to compare. All
comparisons were made in a computed with an Intel i9-13900H CPU (14 cores) and an NVidia laptop RTX 4070 GPU.




5.1 Modified Balanced Excitation-Inhibition

In this section, we will use TVB C++ to reproduce the results previously obtained by Deco et al.50 . The full Balanced
Excitation/Inhibition (BEI) model32 at the whole-brain level is expressed by the following system of coupled differential




   3 https://github.com/neich/tvb-root-cpp/blob/main/python/tvbcpp.ipynb




                                                                                                                                7/25
equations:
        (E)                     (E)                      (E)         (I)
       Ik     = WE Io + w+ JN Sk + JN G ∑ Ck j S j − Jk Sk + Iext ,
                                              j
        (I)             (E)  (I)                               (E)
       Ik = WI Io + JN Sk − Sk + λ JN G            ∑ Ck j S j ,
                                                    j
                                         (E)
       (E)         (E)          MkE (aE Ik − bE )
      rk = H (E) (Ik ) =                      (E)
                                                        ,
                         1 − exp(−dE MkE (aE Ik − bE ))
                                             (I)
        (I)           (I)             MkI (aI Ik − bI )
       rk = H (I) (Ik ) =                               (I)
                                                                     ,
                             1 − exp(−dI MkI (aI Ik − bI ))
                (E)
        (E)   Sk             (E)         (E)
      Ṡk = −       + (1 − Sk ) γH (E) (Ik ),
               τE
                (I)
         (I)  S             (I)
       Ṡk = − k + H (I) (Ik )
               τI
Here, the last two equations should add, when integrating, an uncorrelated standard Gaussian noise term with an amplitude of
σ = 0.01nA (Euler-Maruyama integration).
     The parameters of this model were originally defined in Wong and Wang53 to emulate resting-state conditions, such that each
isolated node displays the typical noisy spontaneous activity with low firing rate (H (E) ∼ 3Hz) observed in electrophysiology
experiments. Moreover, following Deco et al.32 , the inhibition weight, Jn , was adjusted separately for each node n such that the
firing rate of the excitatory pools H (E) remains clamped at 3Hz even when receiving excitatory input from connected areas.
It has been demonstrated that this mechanism leads to a better prediction of the resting-state FC and a more realistic evoked
activity32 . We refer to this model as the balanced excitation-inhibition (BEI) model.
     To study the effects of LSD, Deco and co-authors50 used local regional information, introduced in the form of a detailed
map of 5 − HT2A receptor density of the neuromodulator serotonin, obtained from a new high-resolution human brain in vivo
atlas. For this, they defined a global gain scaling parameter, added to the original fixed gain parameters (which were the same
for all regions), and thus scaling the regional 5 − HT2A receptor values influencing the recursive circuits of excitatory and
inhibitory neurons. In mathematical terms, we modify the value of MkE in the above equations as

      MkE = gE (1 + s 5HT 2Ak )

with gE the value previously used32 , 5HT 2Ak the neuroreceptor density for the k-th region, and s the scaling factor. The
procedure follows the somewhat standard pipeline in these cases: first, fit the model to the placebo condition but not the LSD
condition, i.e., assuming zero values of the scaling that correspond to the original gain values. Then, a scaling value that fits the
LSD condition (using the sensitivity of the functional connectivity dynamics) while still using the original whole-brain placebo
model, but now including the new element of receptor binding, which modulates each region with the different empirical
measures of the receptor binding. Thus, here we verify their results with TVB C++, showing that neurotransmitter modulation
of whole-brain activity dynamics can be quantitatively ascribed to one type of receptor binding (here 5 − HT2A ) that modulates
brain-wide neural responses.
    As a first test, we compared TVB C++ with TVB-Python version 2.8.1, with FAST_TVB, and with RateML. In all cases,
we use a reduced Wong Wang model32 and the Julich-Brain probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps as a microstructural reference
parcellation from the multilevel Human Brain Atlas, of 379 regions. All simulations evaluate 10 seconds and use a deterministic
integration with an integration delta of 0.1 ms. Execution times are shown in Table 1. In Figure 5, top row, we show the plot
of the first state variables (Se ) of the 379-region model over 10 seconds. Both results shown are numerically identical. For
the sake of completeness, although the random number generators in Python and C++ are different, we compared one of the
models, the BEI model, with noise, both for TVB and TVB C++, leading to practically indistinguishable results except for the
noise itself, see Figure 6.

                                                        TVB          FAST_TVB    TVB C++
                                                        40.1               5.1     6.4

                      Table 1. Execution times for the reduced Wong Wang model simulation (in seconds).



                                                                                                                                8/25
Feedback Inhibition Control:      As a use case beyond brain simulations, we have implemented the Feedback Inhibition Control
mechanism proposed by Deco et al.32 . We have implemented the optimization method that allows finding the Ji values that
allow the neuron’s firing rates to stay in a given interval, for every value of the global coupling value G. In particular, we have
reproduced Figure 2C of Deco et al.32 , see Figure 5, lower right. In this case, the results are not numerically identical since we
are not using the same data as used in the paper for the test, but, as can be seen, the outcome is completely equivalent.

5.2 Mean Field Adaptive Integrate and Fire Neurons (mean-field AdEx)
In this section, we will elaborate on the first and second-order Mean-Field Adaptive Integrate and Fire (mean-field AdEx)
model.
First Order model:           A mean-field model of conductance-based networks of adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire neurons35
            ∂ νµ
        T        = − Fµ (νe , νi ) + νµ , ∀µ ∈ {e, i}
             ∂t
            ∂Wk
                 =Wk /tauw − b ∗ Ek
             ∂t
where νµ = {E, I}, and Fλ is the Transfer Function, which should be tailored for each specific type of single neuron model
desired. Carlu et al.39 used this framework to obtain Transfer Functions for diverse models such as nonlinear integrate-and-fire
or Hodgkin-Huxley models.
Second Order model:        A mean-field model of conductance-based networks of spiking neurons with adaptation34 . The
general formulation for the mean-field AdEx adaptation second order model (a.k.a., Zerlaut’s model, di Volo’s model, ...) as a
dynamical unit at a node k in a network with l nodes reads ∀µ, λ , η ∈ {e, i}3 :

           ∂ νµ                 1       ∂ 2 Fµ
         T       =(Fµ − νµ ) + cλ η
            ∂t                  2     ∂ νλ ∂ νη
          ∂ cλ η
        T        =Aλ η + (Fλ − νλ ) (Fη − νη )+
            ∂t
                       ∂ Fµ       ∂ Fµ
                  cλ µ      + cµη        − 2cλ η
                       ∂ νλ        ∂ νη
           ∂Wk
                 =Wk /tauw − b ∗ Ek
            ∂t
with:
                 ( F (1/T −F )
                        λ
                            Nλ
                                 λ
                                          if λ = η
        Aλ η =
                    0                     otherwise

    This model has recently been extended to Whole-Brain modeling40 by adding the coupling through the structural connectivity
into the synaptic current.
    We have also performed tests with other, more complex models, like the mean-field AdEx second order model34, 35 . In this
case, comparison can only be done with TVB, since FAST_TVB only works with the reduced Wong Wang model and does not
allow new models to be easily incorporated. In both cases (i.e., TVB and TVB C++), testing another model involves only the
change of a single line of code. In Figure 7a we show the excitatory firing rate of the 379-region model over 10 seconds. Again,
both results are numerically identical.

                                                            TVB     TVB C++
                                                           489.65      23.5

                    Table 2. Execution times for the mean-field AdEx first order model simulation (in seconds).

    Execution times are shown in Table 2. As can be seen, simulation times are speeded up about 10x times with TVB C++.
This takes into account that TVB Python uses Numba to accelerate the core of the simulation and the computation of the
derivatives of the differential equations of the model. In TVB C++ we have not applied any further specific optimization.
    Thus, the last set of tests has been performed using the mean-field AdEx model34, 35, 38 . In this case, we have reproduced
some of the results presented in34 , specifically Figure 2 in the paper. The results are shown in Figure 7.


                                                                                                                              9/25
5.3 FRE Model
Montbrió and coworkers36, 37 , proposed a method to derive the Firing Rate Equations (FREs) for networks of heterogeneous,
all-to-all coupled quadratic integrate-and-fire (QIF) neurons, which is exact in the thermodynamic limit, i.e., for large numbers
of neurons. Their formulation uses mean-field equations to reveal a dual role of electrical synapses: First, they equalize
membrane potentials favoring the emergence of synchrony. Second, electrical synapses act as “virtual chemical synapses”,
which can be either excitatory or inhibitory depending upon the spike shape. The original results offer a precise mathematical
explanation of the intricate effect of electrical synapses in collective synchronization.

                     dr    ∆
                 τ      =    + 2ru − gr
                     dt   τπ                                                                                                    (2)
          du
      τ      = u2 + η̄ − (πτr)2 + (J + g ln a)τr
          dt
The parameters η̄ and ∆ are, respectively, the center and width of the static distribution of inputs to the individual spiking
neurons, which is considered Lorentzian. Also, we have the recurrent inputs with their synaptic weight J, and the electric
synapses weighted by their respective weight g.
   This model can be extended to an Excitatory-Inhibitory (E-I) network of quadratic integrate-and-fire neurons modeling a
Pyramidal-Interneuronal Network Gamma (PING) rhythm54, 55 , and then extend it again to a whole-brain made of these E-I
nodes, by formulating the system of equations:

                          drej       ∆e
                     τe          =       + 2rej uej − ge rej
                          dt       τ eπ
                         drij        ∆i
                      τi       = i + 2rij uij − gi rij
                           dt       τπ
                     du  e
                         j
                 τe         = uej 2 + η¯e − (πτ e rej )2 + I ej
                      dt
                     duij          2
                  τi         = uij + η¯ i − (πτ i rij )2 + I ij
                      dt                                                                                                        (3)
                            dSeej
                       τN          = −See  j +J
                                                  N(ee) e
                                                       rj
                              dt
                             dSiej
                       τN          = −Siej + J N(ie) rej
                              dt
      I ej = Iext
              e
                  + τ e See j − JjJ
                                      G(ei) i i
                                            τ r j + GJ A τ e ∑ Ck j Skee
                                                                k̸= j

                     I ij = Iext
                             i
                                 + τ e Siej − J G(ii) τ i rij

     Observe that, in this last expression, we have the long-range synaptic weight J A , identified with the AMPA current. Also,
we introduced the slower NMDA gating variable S, which modulates connections from the excitatory population into both the
excitatory and inhibitory populations, being regulated by its respective time constant τ N . Finally, the inhibitory connections
have been associated with GABA, so we have labeled its constant as J G (xi), with x being the receiving population (excitatory
e or inhibitory i). From this system, it is easy to recover the equations used by Sanz Perl and co-workers56 by removing the
electrical coupling (ge = gi = 0), removing the FIC mechanism, assuming no external stimulation (Iext    e = I i = 0), considering
                                                                                                                 ext
        e    i    m
that τ = τ = τ , equating J     long,e = J , and considering the steady state of all the gating variables Se,i .
                                          ee

     Once the full whole-brain model is implemented, to recover the original formulation by Montbrió and coworkers37 , we need,
first, to decouple all populations by setting G = 0, then decouple the inhibitory and excitatory populations by choosing J G = 0,
and finally approximate the behavior of the gating variable S by its steady state behavior. However, this last step requires setting
dS
 dt = 0, which is not possible without modifying the code. However, depending on the integration algorithm used, we could set
τ N = ∆t, which, for Euler-Maruyama will reduce to the correct expression for S, and for other more advanced integrators (e.g.,
Runge-Kutta) will lead to an average of the firing rate during the current time-step. In particular, we have reproduced Figure 3
from the original paper, using three values of the spike asymmetry parameter a: 0.25, 1, and 4 (see Figure 8a).
     Using the same settings, we can go beyond the results presented in the original papers and extend the model to a whole-brain
simulation. The results for the behavior of one node, when coupled with all the others for values of G of 1/4 and 1, are shown in
Figure 8. As expected, the behavior for a given node changes significantly when coupled with the rest of the network, showing
significant oscillatory behavior.


                                                                                                                             10/25
5.4 BOLD simulations
Another basic feature of TVB C++ is the ability to use a BOLD monitor to compute fMRI signals from the raw output of the
models, such as the models presented before. FAST_TVB also computes a BOLD signal from the reduced Wong Wang model
but is limited to the Balloon-Windkessel hemodynamic model. We have compared BOLD signal generation in our model with
both TVB 2.8.1 and FAST_TVB. As already mentioned, since the details of the BOLD algorithm used are different for both of
these systems (see above), TVB C++ implements both of them to perform fair comparisons.

5.4.1 BOLD monitor using HRF convolutions
TVB 2.8.1 implements, as its main option, a hemodynamic response function (HRF) to compute the BOLD signal. In the
current implementation, these HRF kernels are implemented using a first-order Volterra kernel. To test BOLD generation we
have used a smaller parcellation to have shorter execution times. In particular, we used the Desikan parcellation with 68 regions.
Execution times are shown in Table 3. In figure 5, middle row, we show the plot of a BOLD signal over 2 minutes. As can be
seen, both are numerically identical.

                                                       TVB       TVB C++
                                                     250.895        4.41

Table 3. Execution times for the reduced Wang Wong BOLD generation, using the Desikan parcellation (68 ROIs) and with
the HRF convolution-based model.

    From Table 3 we can observe a speedup of about 50x, which includes both the Reduced Wong Wang model simulations,
and the BOLD simulation. This result is mainly because the BOLD computations in TVB do not use any kind of acceleration
(e.g., using the numba library) and are pure Python. In these cases, the performance difference can be quite dramatic.

5.4.2 BOLD monitor using Balloon-Windkessel
We have also compared BOLD generation from electrical activity obtained from a simulation with FAST_TVB. In this case,
both FAST_TVB and TVB C++ use a Balloon-Windkessel algorithm. We have used the same smaller parcellation to have a
meaningful comparison. Execution times are shown in Table 4. In Figure 5, first row, we show the plot of the BOLD signal
over 2 minutes. Again, both signals are numerically identical.

                                                   FAST_TVB        TVB C++
                                                       10.89          4.26

Table 4. Execution times for the reduced Wang Wong BOLD generation using the Balloon-Windkesssel model, with the
Desikan parcellation (68 ROI).

    The 3x speedup found here could be explained because, with this parcellation and this model, the BOLD computations
take the bulk of the total time, and these operations are vector and matrix intensive, and we strongly believe the optimizations
provided by the Eigen library are responsible.
    Up to this point, all comparisons have been conducted within a single-threaded process. However, several algorithms
necessitate a fitting process of model parameters, thereby requiring parallel execution of numerous simulations. In this regard,
both FAST_TVB and TVB C++ are equipped to leverage multi-core CPUs for parallel execution. Nevertheless, for extensive
parallel executions, the utilization of GPUs proves to be more efficient.
    The TVB project has introduced a GPU backend named RateML, which entails rewriting the model derivative equations to
enable their use within a CUDA kernel. A comparison between RateML and TVB C++ is presented in Figure 9. The findings
demonstrate that for a small number of parallel executions (up to 180/190), TVB C++ exhibits superior performance, especially
at lower numbers. However, in scenarios requiring massive parameter sweeps, RateML surpasses TVB C++ by an order of
magnitude in terms of efficiency.

6 Summary and Discussion
As demonstrated, TVB C++ surpasses the original TVB Python implementation in terms of speed and performance while
preserving its flexibility. The primary role of TVB C++ as an efficient Back-End for demanding computational tasks is seamless
and economical, thanks to its Python bindings tailored for ease of use and adaptability. It is noteworthy that TVB C++ holds
significant potential for further optimization, leveraging available libraries such as Intel MKL or CUDA. Additionally, unlike


                                                                                                                           11/25
Python, which is hindered by the Global Interpreter Lock, the C++ version of TVB C++ can effortlessly exploit native threads.
The current iteration of TVB C++ offers a straightforward thread pool mechanism to capitalize on multicore architectures. TVB
C++ constitutes a valuable addition to the TVB family owing to its high compatibility, exceptional flexibility, and superior
performance. It emerges as an ideal backend for computationally intensive tasks, requiring no additional expertise beyond TVB
basics.
    In conclusion, TVB C++ stands as a formidable asset in the realm of computational neuroscience, offering a compelling
blend of speed, flexibility, and ease of use. Through meticulous optimization and seamless integration with the renowned TVB
platform, TVB C++ elevates the capacity for large-scale simulations and heavy-duty computational tasks to unprecedented
heights. Its exceptional performance, outpacing the original TVB-Python implementation, underscores its prowess as a backend
solution for tackling complex neuroscientific inquiries with efficiency and precision. Moreover, TVB C++’s compatibility and
intuitive Python bindings ensure a smooth transition for users, requiring no additional expertise beyond fundamental TVB
knowledge.
    With the potential for further optimization and the ability to harness advanced computing resources like supercomputers,
TVB C++ emerges as an indispensable tool for researchers seeking to push the boundaries of computational neuroscience.
By seamlessly marrying speed, flexibility, and ease of use, TVB C++ paves the way for groundbreaking discoveries and
advancements in our understanding of the brain’s intricate dynamics.

Code availability
All the code described in this paper can be found in a Github public repository52 .

Author contributions (CRediT)
PR, VJ and GD: conceptualization, methodology. IM, GZ, JF, MS and GP: methodology. IM: development, software. IM,
GP, GZ, GD, MS, PR: Visualization, Investigation. PR, VJ, GP: Formal Analysis. IM, GZ, GP: Writing – original draft. GP:
Funding acquisition. All authors: Validation, Data curation, Writing – review and editing

Acknowledgements
We thank Michiel van der Vlag for assisting in the comparisons to Rate ML. We thank Alain Destexhe, Damien Depannemaecker
and Ernest Montbrió for their help adapting the Mean-field AdEx and the ERP population models.

Funding
IM and GP were partially funded by Grant PID2021-122136OB-C22 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and
by ERDF A way of making Europe. This work has been supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under Specific Grant Agreement No. 785907 (HBP SGA2) and Specific Grant Agreement No. 945539
(Human Brain Project SGA3). This work was supported by the Virtual Research Environment at the Charité Berlin – a node
of EBRAINS Health Data Cloud. Part of computation has been performed on the HPC for Research cluster of the Berlin
Institute of Health. PR acknowledges support by EU Horizon Europe program Horizon EBRAINS2.0 (101147319), Virtual
Brain Twin (101137289), EBRAINS-PREP 101079717, AISN – 101057655, EBRAIN-Health 101058516, Digital Europe
TEF-Health 101100700; German Research Foundation SFB 1436 (project ID 425899996); SFB 1315 (project ID 327654276);
SFB 936 (project ID 178316478; SFB-TRR 295 (project ID 424778381); SPP Computational Connectomics RI 2073/6-1, RI
2073/10-2,RI 2073/9-1; DFG Clinical Research Group BECAUSE-Y 504745852, PHRASE Horizon EIC grant; 101058240;
Berlin Institute of Health & Foundation Charité,

Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.

References
 1. Gewaltig, M.-O. & Diesmann, M. Nest (neural simulation tool). Scholarpedia 2, 1430 (2007).
 2. Stimberg, M., Brette, R. & Goodman, D. F. Brian 2, an intuitive and efficient neural simulator. eLife 8, e47314, DOI:
    10.7554/eLife.47314 (2019).


                                                                                                                       12/25
 3. Dura-Bernal, S. et al. Netpyne, a tool for data-driven multiscale modeling of brain circuits. eLife 8, DOI: 10.7554/elife.
    44494 (2019).
 4. Hines, M. L. & Carnevale, N. T. Neuron: A tool for neuroscientists. The Neurosci. 7, 123–135, DOI: 10.1177/
    107385840100700207 (2001).
 5. Migliore, M., Cannia, C., Lytton, W. W., Markram, H. & Hines, M. L. Parallel network simulations with neuron. J. Comput.
    Neurosci. 21, 119–129, DOI: 10.1007/s10827-006-7949-5 (2006).
 6. Bekolay, T. et al. Nengo: a python tool for building large-scale functional brain models. Front. Neuroinformatics 7, DOI:
    10.3389/fninf.2013.00048 (2014).
 7. Dai, K. et al. Brain modeling toolkit: An open source software suite for multiscale modeling of brain circuits. PLOS
    Comput. Biol. 16, e1008386, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008386 (2020).
 8. Leon, P. S. et al. The virtual brain: a simulator of primate brain network dynamics. Front. Neuroinformatics 7, DOI:
    10.3389/fninf.2013.00010 (2013).
 9. Ritter, P., Schirner, M., McIntosh, A. R. & Jirsa, V. K. The virtual brain integrates computational modeling and multimodal
    neuroimaging. Brain Connect. 3, 121–145, DOI: 10.1089/brain.2012.0120 (2013).
10. Sanz-Leon, P., Knock, S. A., Spiegler, A. & Jirsa, V. K. Mathematical framework for large-scale brain network modeling
    in the virtual brain. NeuroImage 111, 385–430, DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.002 (2015).
11. Schirner, M. et al. Brain simulation as a cloud service: The virtual brain on ebrains. NeuroImage 251, 118973, DOI:
    10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.118973 (2022).
12. van der Vlag, M. et al. RateML: A code generation tool for brain network models. Front. Netw. Physiol. 2, DOI:
    10.3389/fnetp.2022.826345 (2022).
13. van der Vlag, M. et al. Vast tvb parameter space exploration: A modular framework for accelerating the multi-scale
    simulation of human brain dynamics, DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2311.13337 (2023).
14. Guennebaud, G., Jacob, B. et al. Eigen v3. http://eigen.tuxfamily.org (2010).
15. Thomas Yeo, B. T. et al. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J.
    Neurophysiol. 106, 1125–1165, DOI: 10.1152/jn.00338.2011 (2011).
16. Allen, E. A. et al. Tracking Whole-Brain Connectivity Dynamics in the Resting State. Cereb. Cortex 24, 663–676, DOI:
    10.1093/cercor/bhs352 (2012). https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-pdf/24/3/663/14099596/bhs352.pdf.
17. Hansen, E. C., Battaglia, D., Spiegler, A., Deco, G. & Jirsa, V. K. Functional connectivity dynamics: Modeling the
    switching behavior of the resting state. NeuroImage 105, 525–535, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.001
    (2015).
18. Kringelbach, M. L., McIntosh, A. R., Ritter, P., Jirsa, V. K. & Deco, G. The rediscovery of slowness: Exploring the timing
    of cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 616–628, DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.07.011 (2015).
19. Deco, G. et al. The arrow of time of brain signals in cognition: Potential intriguing role of parts of the default mode
    network. Netw. Neurosci. 7, 966–998, DOI: 10.1162/netn_a_00300 (2023).
20. Jirsa, V. et al. The virtual epileptic patient: Individualized whole-brain models of epilepsy spread. NeuroImage 145,
    377–388, DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.04.049 (2017).
21. Makhalova, J. et al. Virtual epileptic patient brain modeling: Relationships with seizure onset and surgical outcome.
    Epilepsia 63, 1942–1955, DOI: 10.1111/epi.17310 (2022).
22. Adhikari, M. H. et al. Decreased integration and information capacity in stroke measured by whole brain models of resting
    state activity. Brain 140, 1068–1085, DOI: 10.1093/brain/awx021 (2017).
23. Rocha, R. P. et al. Recovery of neural dynamics criticality in personalized whole-brain models of stroke. Nat. Commun.
    13, DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-30892-6 (2022).
24. Idesis, S. et al. A low dimensional embedding of brain dynamics enhances diagnostic accuracy and behavioral prediction
    in stroke. Sci. Reports 13, DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-42533-z (2023).
25. Stefanovski, L. et al. Linking molecular pathways and large-scale computational modeling to assess candidate disease
    mechanisms and pharmacodynamics in alzheimer’s disease. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 13, 54, DOI: 10.3389/fncom.2019.
    00054 (2019).


                                                                                                                         13/25
26. Patow, G., Stefanovski, L., Ritter, P., Deco, G. & Kobeleva, X. Whole-brain modeling of the differential influences of
    amyloid-beta and tau in alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Res. & Ther. 15, DOI: 10.1186/s13195-023-01349-9 (2023).
27. Gast, R. et al. Pyrates—a python framework for rate-based neural simulations. PLOS ONE 14, e0225900, DOI:
    10.1371/journal.pone.0225900 (2019).
28. Cakan, C., Jajcay, N. & Obermayer, K. neurolib: A simulation framework for whole-brain neural mass modeling. Cogn.
    Comput. 15, 1132–1152, DOI: 10.1007/s12559-021-09931-9 (2021).
29. Schirner, M., Rothmeier, S., Jirsa, V. K., McIntosh, A. R. & Ritter, P. An automated pipeline for constructing personalized
    virtual brains from multimodal neuroimaging data. NeuroImage 117, 343–357, DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.03.055
    (2015).
30. Schirner, M., McIntosh, A. R., Jirsa, V., Deco, G. & Ritter, P. Inferring multi-scale neural mechanisms with brain network
    modelling. eLife 7, DOI: 10.7554/elife.28927 (2018).
31. Vella, M. et al. libneuroml and pylems: using python to combine procedural and declarative modeling approaches in
    computational neuroscience. Front. Neuroinformatics 8, DOI: 10.3389/fninf.2014.00038 (2014).
32. Deco, G. et al. How local excitation–inhibition ratio impacts the whole brain dynamics. J. Neurosci. 34, 7886–7898, DOI:
    10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5068-13.2014 (2014). http://www.jneurosci.org/content/34/23/7886.full.pdf.
33. Aquilué-Llorens, D., Goldman, J. S. & Destexhe, A. High-density exploration of activity states in a multi-area brain model.
    Neuroinformatics DOI: 10.1007/s12021-023-09647-1 (2023).
34. di Volo, M., Romagnoni, A., Capone, C. & Destexhe, A. Biologically realistic mean-field models of conductance-based
    networks of spiking neurons with adaptation. Neural Comput. 31, 653–680, DOI: 10.1162/neco_a_01173 (2019).
35. Zerlaut, Y., Chemla, S., Chavane, F. & Destexhe, A. Modeling mesoscopic cortical dynamics using a mean-field model of
    conductance-based networks of adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire neurons. J. computational neuroscience 44, 45—61,
    DOI: 10.1007/s10827-017-0668-2 (2018).
36. Montbrió, E., Pazó, D. & Roxin, A. Macroscopic description for networks of spiking neurons. Phys. Rev. X 5, DOI:
    10.1103/physrevx.5.021028 (2015).
37. Montbrió, E. & Pazó, D. Exact mean-field theory explains the dual role of electrical synapses in collective synchronization.
    Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, DOI: 10.1103/physrevlett.125.248101 (2020).
38. El Boustani, S. & Destexhe, A. A Master Equation Formalism for Macroscopic Modeling of Asynchronous Irregular
    Activity States. Neural Comput. 21, 46–100, DOI: 10.1162/neco.2009.02-08-710 (2009). https://direct.mit.edu/neco/
    article-pdf/21/1/46/818085/neco.2009.02-08-710.pdf.
39. Carlu, M. et al. A mean-field approach to the dynamics of networks of complex neurons, from nonlinear integrate-and-fire
    to hodgkin–huxley models. J. Neurophysiol. 123, 1042–1051, DOI: 10.1152/jn.00399.2019 (2020).
40. Goldman, J. S. et al. A comprehensive neural simulation of slow-wave sleep and highly responsive wakefulness dynamics.
    Front. Comput. Neurosci. 16, DOI: 10.3389/fncom.2022.1058957 (2023).
41. Buxton, R. B. & Frank, L. R. A model for the coupling between cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism during neural
    stimulation. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 17, 64–72 (1997).
42. Friston, K. J., Mechelli, A., Turner, R. & Price, C. J. Nonlinear responses in fMRI: the balloon model, volterra kernels, and
    other hemodynamics. Neuroimage 12, 466–477 (2000).
43. Boynton, G. M., Engel, S. A., Glover, G. H. & Heeger, D. J. Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic resonance
    imaging in human V1. J. Neurosci. 16, 4207–4221 (1996).
44. Polonsky, A., Blake, R., Braun, J. & Heeger, D. J. Neuronal activity in human primary visual cortex correlates with
    perception during binocular rivalry. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 1153–1159 (2000).
45. Glover, G. H. Deconvolution of impulse response in event-related BOLD fMRI1. Neuroimage 9, 416–429 (1999).
46. Friston, K. J., Josephs, O., Rees, G. & Turner, R. Nonlinear event-related responses in fmri. Magn. Reson. Medicine 39,
    41–52, DOI: 10.1002/mrm.1910390109 (1998).
47. Obata, T. et al. Discrepancies between BOLD and flow dynamics in primary and supplementary motor areas: application
    of the balloon model to the interpretation of BOLD transients. NeuroImage 21, 144–153, DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.
    08.040 (2004).
48. Stephan, K. E., Weiskopf, N., Drysdale, P. M., Robinson, P. A. & Friston, K. J. Comparing hemodynamic models with
    DCM. NeuroImage 38, 387–401, DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.07.040 (2007).


                                                                                                                           14/25
49. Stephan, K. E. et al. Nonlinear dynamic causal models for fMRI. NeuroImage 42, 649–662, DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.
    2008.04.262 (2008).
50. Deco, G. et al. Whole-brain multimodal neuroimaging model using serotonin receptor maps explains non-linear functional
    effects of lsd. Curr. Biol. 28, 3065–3074.e6, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.07.083 (2018).
51. Deco, G. & Kringelbach, M. L. Metastability and coherence: Extending the communication through coherence hypothesis
    using a whole-brain computational perspective. Trends Neurosci. 39, 125–135, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2016.01.
    001 (2016).
52. Martín, I. TVB C++ Library. https://github.com/neich/tvb-root-cpp (2022).
53. Wong, K.-F. & Wang, X.-J. A recurrent network mechanism of time integration in perceptual decisions. J. Neurosci. 26,
    1314–1328, DOI: 10.1523/jneurosci.3733-05.2006 (2006).
54. Dumont, G. & Gutkin, B. Macroscopic phase resetting-curves determine oscillatory coherence and signal transfer in
    inter-coupled neural circuits. PLOS Comput. Biol. 15, e1007019, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007019 (2019).
55. Reyner-Parra, D. & Huguet, G. Phase-locking patterns underlying effective communication in exact firing rate models of
    neural networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 18, e1009342 (2022).
56. Sanz Perl, Y. et al. The impact of regional heterogeneity in whole-brain dynamics in the presence of oscillations. Netw.
    Neurosci. 7, 632–660, DOI: 10.1162/netn_a_00299 (2023).




                                                                                                                      15/25
Figure Labels

DTI/Tractography
                                   Structural
                                  Connectivity




           Parcellation


                                                                                              Simulated
                                    Model FC                                                    BOLD


                                                                                                 Fitting

                                  Empirical FC



      Empirical Resting
 Correlation of BOLD signals

                   Figure 1. Overview of the original TVB and the TVB C++ system pipelines.




                                                                                                          16/25
Figure 2. First level of detail of the architecture of the TVB system. Taken from the TVB main documentation.




                                                                                                                17/25
               Application Interfaces                                  Back-End System

                        Jupyter                              Python
                                                                               Simulation Component
                       notebook                             Bindings
                                                                                Analyzer Component

                       Console                                C++
                       Interface                              API
                                                                                DATA TYPES




                 Download component

               Visualization Component                              Storage System




Figure 3. Architecture of the TVB C++ system. The architecture of TVB C++ revolves around two distinct interfaces tailored
to user interaction. The back-end consists of blocks that seamlessly interface with various top application layers. The data
types serve as the lingua franca between different components such as analyzers, visualizers, simulators, and uploaders. These
datatypes embody "active data," meaning that when TVB C++ is configured with a database, data encapsulated data type
instances are automatically kept. Presently, the console interface operates independently of the storage layer, storing results
solely in memory. Consequently, users employing the console interface must manually manage data import and export
operations.


                                                        tvb-cpp


                       simulator                                                              tools



      model                              coupling                   observables              numpy                 scipy
       Zerlaut                             Dense              FC                                                   signal
      Montbrio                            Sparse              Phase interaction matrix                             stats
     Wong-wang                                                Sliding window FC




    integrator                           monitor
 Euler deterministic                        Raw
   Euler stochastic                  Temporal average



       noise                              bold
                                   Bold TVB (convolution)
                                   Ballon-Windkessel



                       simulator




Figure 4. Main modules of TVB C++. On the left branch are all the core simulation modules, i.e., model, coupling, integrator,
monitor, noise, BOLD, and the simulator itself. On the right, are the tools, e.g., observables, and the numpy and scipy
interfaces.


                                                                                                                         18/25
Figure 5. Different plots comparing different platforms with the Reduced Wong Wang model. Top: Plot of a (direct)
simulation with TVB, FAST_TVB, and TVB C++. Middle: Plot of a BOLD signal with TVB C++ and TVB, using HRF
convolutions. Bottom, first two columns: Plot of a BOLD signal from a whole brain simulation with TVB C++ and TVB, using
the Balloon-Windkesssel model. Observe that in all cases, all platforms compared in the same rows produce the exact same
result. Bottom right: Plot of the maximum firing rate of the neuron population for the same model, with and without the FIC
mechanism.




                                                                                                                     19/25
Figure 6. Different simulations comparing how adding noise changes the results of the simulations with the Modified
Balanced Excitation-Inhibition model. Left column: 10s simulation comparing TVB and TVB C++. Middle column: 200s
simulation comparing TVB and TVB C++, both used to generate a BOLD signal. Right column: two examples of a BOLD
signal computed from the previous simulation, using the same algorithm (standard TVB monitor convolution) with both TVB
and TVB C++. Observe that in all cases, despite the random number generation is not exactly the same, all comparisons
produce a very similar global result. Noise used is σ = 1e−5 in both TVB and TVB C++.




                                                                                                                 20/25
                                                             (a)




                              (b)                                                           (c)

Figure 7. Reproducing the results of mean-field AdEx module from di Volo et al.34 . (a) Plot of a whole brain simulation with
TVB and TVB C++ for the mean-field AdEx first-order model. (b) the stable firing rate of the model for different values of the
adaptation parameter be . (c) the firing rate distribution is predicted by the model for be = 60.




                                                                                                                        21/25
                                                              (a)




                              (b)                                                            (c)

Figure 8. Using TVB C++to reproduce the result of a whole brain simulation using the FRE model37 (Figure 3 in the
manuscript). (a) Three values of the spike asymmetry parameter a are used: 1/4, 1 and 4. (b-c) Using a Desikan parcellation
with 70 ROI, setting the spike asymmetry parameter a at 1/4 (b) and 1 (c) and showing the variation in the firing rate when the
coupling parameter G varies from 0 to 5.




                                                                                                                         22/25
                              (a)                                                            (b)

Figure 9. On the left panel we see the execution times for RateML as the number of parallel executions grows. From 1 to
2000 parallel runs, the time is almost constant around 11.5 minutes. However, when the GPU limit is reached, the time starts to
behave linearly with the number of executions. On the right panel, the execution times of RateML against TVB C++. We can
observe a linear behavior for TVB C++ almost since the beginning, being more efficient up to 180/190 parallel executions,
when RateML outperforms it given the massively parallel characteristic of modern GPUs.




                                                                                                                         23/25
 1 import tvbcpp
 2 import numpy as np
 3 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
 4 import scipy.io as sio
 5
 6 dt = 0.1 # Integration step in [ms]
 7 m = sio.loadmat("CNT_S01_structure.mat")["CNT_S01_structure"]
 8 m = m / np.max(m) * 0.2 # normallize matrix
 9
10 # Set the structural connectivity matrix
11 tvbcpp.set_weights(m)
12 n_rois = m.shape[0]
13
14   print(f"Loaded connectivity matrix with {n_rois} number of ROIs")
15
16   tvbcpp.set_model("Montbrio")     # Choose the neuronal model
17
18 # Configure the integrator.
19 sigmas = np.array([0.0, 0, 0, 0, 1e-3, 1e-3])
20 tvbcpp.set_integrator("EulerStochastic", dt, sigmas)
21
22 # Configure the initial state of the model
23 n_state_vars = 6
24 initial_state = np.zeros((n_rois, n_state_vars))
25 tvbcpp.set_initial_state(initial_state)
26
27   tvbcpp.set_global_coupling(80.1)     # Set the global coupling
28
29   tvbcpp.set_model_parameter("delta_i", 1.18)       # Homogeneous working point [SanzPerl’23]
30
31   T = 300000 # simulation time in [ms]
32   tvbcpp.add_temporal_average_monitor(1.0, [0])       # temporal average monitor
33
34   result = tvbcpp.run_sim(0, T)     # Run the simulation
35
36   data_raw = result[0] # get the result of the first monitor
37   time_series = data_raw[1][:, :, 0]
38
39   tr = 2000 # BOLD sampling rate in [ms]
40
41 bold_2007b = tvbcpp.create_bold("Stephan2007b", tr) # Create a BOLD object.
42 # Compute the BOLD signal from a time series of raw data
43 ts_2007b, data_bold_2007b = bold_2007b.compute_bold(time_series, 1.0)
44
45 # Subsample originial time series from Stephan2007b
46 n_2007b = T // tr
47 t_sub_2007b = np.zeros((n_2007b,))
48 data_sub_2007b = np.zeros((n_2007b, data_bold_2007b.shape[1]))
49 for n in range(n_2007b):
50     t_sub_2007b[n] = np.mean(ts_2007b[n*tr:(n+1)*tr])
51     data_sub_2007b[n, :] = np.mean(data_bold_2007b[n*tr:(n+1)*tr, :], axis=0)
               Listing 1. Python bindings example. The output from this code gives the results shown in Figure 8.




                                                                                                                    24/25
1 # Plot for run_sim
2 fig, axs = plt.subplots(nrows=3, ncols=1, figsize=(10,10), sharex=True)
3 axs = axs.flatten()
4
5 axs[0].plot(data_raw[0][5000:], data_raw[1][5000:,:,0])
6 axs[1].plot(t_sub_2007b[2:], data_sub_2007b[2:, :])
7 axs[2].plot(ts_tvb[2:], data_bold_tvb[2:, :])
8
9   plt.show()
                                 Listing 2. Code to plot the output from Listing 1




                                                                                     25/25
