                                                   Sparse covariate-driven factorization of high-dimensional
                                                  brain connectivity with application to site effect correction
                                                                  Rongqian Zhang1∗, Elena Tuzhilina1 , Jun Young Park1,2†
                                                        1
                                                            Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
                                                              2
                                                                Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
arXiv:2601.09525v1 [stat.ME] 14 Jan 2026




                                           Abstract. Large-scale neuroimaging studies often collect data from multiple scanners across dif-
                                           ferent sites, where variations in scanners, scanning procedures, and other conditions across sites
                                           can introduce artificial site effects. These effects may bias brain connectivity measures, such as
                                           functional connectivity (FC), which quantify functional network organization derived from func-
                                           tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). How to leverage high-dimensional network structures
                                           to effectively mitigate site effects has yet to be addressed. In this paper, we propose SLACC
                                           (Sparse LAtent Covariate-driven Connectome) factorization, a multivariate method that explic-
                                           itly parameterizes covariate effects in latent subject scores corresponding to sparse rank-1 latent
                                           patterns derived from brain connectivity. The proposed method identifies localized site-driven
                                           variability within and across brain networks, enabling targeted correction. We develop a penalized
                                           Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm for parameter estimation, incorporating the Bayesian
                                           Information Criterion (BIC) to guide optimization. Extensive simulations validate SLACC’s ro-
                                           bustness in recovering the true parameters and underlying connectivity patterns. Applied to the
                                           Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) dataset, SLACC demonstrates its ability to reduce
                                           site effects. The R package to implement our method is publicly available.
                                           Keywords: Batch effects; blind-source separation; functional connectivity; sparsity; low-rank; ten-
                                           sor.




                                              ∗
                                                Current affiliation: Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, The University of California San Francisco,
                                           San Francisco, CA, United States.
                                              †
                                                Corresponding author: junjy.park@utoronto.ca


                                                                                                   1
1   Introduction

Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offers a powerful tool for studying brain activity and
structure in both healthy and clinical populations. One of its key applications is functional con-
nectivity (FC) derived from functional MRI (fMRI), which quantifies the statistical dependencies
between blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signals measured over time from two spatially dis-
tinct brain regions (Biswal et al., 1995; Friston et al., 1993; Greicius et al., 2003). FC has been
extensively used to investigate brain network organization and its alterations due to neurodevel-
opment, neuropsychiatric/ neurological disease progression or treatment (Zonneveld et al., 2019;
Van Den Heuvel & Pol, 2010; Fox & Greicius, 2010). Common measures of FC include the Pearson
correlation (Fox et al., 2005), partial correlation (Marrelec et al., 2006) and mutual information
(Z. Wang et al., 2015).
    Despite the widespread use of FC in neuroimaging studies, multi-site data collection introduces
significant challenges to its data quality. In large-scale fMRI studies, data collection often involves
multiple sites and scanners, which can lead to artificial site effects due to differences in scanner
models, scanning protocols, and other local conditions. These effects can increase unwanted vari-
ations in FC, which can confound analyses and limit the generalizability and reproducibility of
findings. Several statistical harmonization methods have been developed to identify, characterize,
and mitigate site effects in neuroimaging data, enabling the construction of harmonized datasets
across multiple sites. ComBat, a prominent approach originally proposed for genomics by Johnson
et al. (2007), characterizes site effects as an additive (mean) and a multiplicative (variance) site
effect for each feature. It has shown great potential for neuroimaging modalities, including diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) (Fortin et al., 2017), cortical thickness (Fortin et al., 2018), and functional
connectivity (Yu et al., 2018). More recent harmonization methods, such as CovBat and RELIEF,
expand the scope of statistical harmonization to address not only mean-variance differences but
also heterogeneity in covariances across sites (A. A. Chen, Beer, et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023,
2024).
    Despite the advancements in harmonization techniques, existing harmonization methods for
brain connectivity data remain limited, ignoring the structure of FC that is represented as a sym-
metric matrix, where each element corresponds to the connection strength, or edge, between two
brain regions. Many methods are based on applying existing harmonization approaches to the
vectorized connectivity matrices (Yu et al., 2018; A. A. Chen, Srinivasan, et al., 2022), thus suffer
from ignoring important network properties inherent to fMRI. This creates difficulties in interpret-
ing how site effects have been identified and corrected within and across brain networks, potentially
leading to suboptimal harmonization.
    In brain network analysis, blind source separation (BSS) and independent component analysis
(ICA) have been used in recent methodological advances to decompose FC into low-rank and
sparse structures. These structures identify patterns between and within functional networks, while
simultaneously quantifying the strength of these patterns in each subject (Eavani et al., 2015; Cai
et al., 2017; Y. Wang & Guo, 2023). Other studies aim to explore the relationships between


                                                  2
connectivity patterns and clinical or demographic factors, as well as other imaging modalities,
typically within a linear modeling framework (Sun & Li, 2017; Zhao et al., 2021; Zhao & Zhao, 2025;
Park, 2025). The connectivity matrix is either used as a high-dimensional predictor to examine its
associations with clinical or demographic variables or other imaging modalities as the response, or
the connectivity matrix itself is modeled as the response to these variables. To reduce the number
of parameters, these models often impose low-rank structures either on the FC matrix itself (Zhao
et al., 2021; Zhao & Zhao, 2025) or on the regression parameters (Sun & Li, 2017). In a more
generalized dimension reduction framework, Lock & Li (2018) propose a likelihood-based latent
variable representation for CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition on tensors of arbitrary
dimensions, where the latent variables are informed by covariates. However, as Zhao et al. (2021)
and Park (2025) noted, incorporating the high dimensionality of the whole-brain network remains
an important methodological and practical challenge.
    In this paper, we hypothesize that leveraging recent advances in latent variable modeling, par-
ticularly in low-rank matrix/tensor factorization techniques, would be beneficial for improving the
harmonization of brain connectivity data. Building on this, we propose a covariate-driven latent
factor model for brain connectivity, which decomposes connectivity data into a linear combination
of low-rank, sparse connectivity patterns, weighted by covariate factors. The sparsity assumption
is motivated by two key considerations. First, the human brain is organized into distinct func-
tional networks, each involving a relatively small number of regions (Salvador et al., 2005). Sparse
connectivity patterns provide a parsimonious representation of these localized connections between
brain regions (Eavani et al., 2015). Second, because connectivity matrices are high-dimensional,
enforcing sparsity in latent patterns reduces the effective number of parameters, resulting in more
stable and reliable estimates while preventing the risk of spurious findings (Y. Wang & Guo, 2023).
    By embedding site and covariate effects into these latent factors, our model aims to identify
and correct for localized site-specific heterogeneity within and across brain networks, while also
accounting for biological effects from covariates. Our model achieves a more efficient and flexible
representation of multi-site connectivity matrices by explicitly using site effects to drive the de-
composition, avoiding the need for vectorization and thus preserving the network properties and
the dependence structure of the connectivity matrix. Moreover, incorporating low-rank structure
and regularization into modeling the sparse connectivity patterns reduces model complexity. To-
gether, these efforts not only allow for the accurate localization and correction of site effects but
also improve the interpretability of these effects in multi-site connectivity data.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce SLACC (sparse latent
covariate-driven connectome) factorization, a low-rank sparse latent factor model, for decomposing
and harmonizing multi-site functional connectivity matrices, along with a penalized Expectation-
Maximization (EM) algorithm. In Section 3, we conduct extensive simulations to demonstrate
SLACC’s ability to recover true parameters and underlying connectivity patterns. In Section 4, we
apply our method to the resting-state fMRI data from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange
(ABIDE) study and compare its performance with other harmonization approaches. We conclude
with a discussion of the merits of SLACC, its limitations and future extensions in Section 5.


                                                 3
2     Methods

2.1    Notation and setup

In this paper, we formulate and present our model under a multi-site setting for generality, although
a single-site setting can be considered as a special case if site effect correction is not a primary
objective. Let i = 1, . . . , M denote the site index and j = 1, . . . , ni denote the subject index in
the ith site. We denote by n = M
                                  P
                                     i=1 ni the total number of subjects in the study. Let xij be the
q-dimensional covariate vector for the subject j in the site i (e.g., age and sex), Xi ∈ Rni ×q to be
the xij stacked in rows for the ith site, and X ∈ Rn×q be the Xi stacked in rows across sites. Let
Yij be a V ×V brain connectivity matrix for the subject j in the site i, where V denotes the number
of brain regions. We define yij = T (Yij ) to be the vector of p = V (V + 1)/2 upper-triangular
entries of Yij including the diagonal entries, and is defined similarly for any symmetric matrix as
an input.
    In this paper, matrices are denoted by bold uppercase letters, while vectors are denoted by
bold lowercase letters. A ⊙ B, refers to the Hadamard product of A and B in same dimension, ⊗
denotes the Kronecker product, and a ◦ b refers to the outer product of a and b. diag(a) refers to
the diagonal matrix with entries a. ||a||q refers to the Lq norm of a.

2.2    Model

In our proposed model, Yij is decomposed into a linear combination of symmetric rank-1 sparse
connectivity patterns {ul u⊤     L
                              l }l=1 common to all sites, weighted by covariate-dependent subject
scores {aijl }L
              l=1 that we further parameterize to capture site and covariate effects. These aijl terms
enable our model to identify and correct for localized site-specific heterogeneity within and across
brain functional networks, while also accounting for biological covariate effects.
   Specifically, we assume that connectivity matrices Yij follow the model:

                                                 L
                                                 X
                                     Yij =             aijl × ul u⊤
                                                                  l + Eij .                        (1)
                                                 l=1


Here, each ul = (ul1 , . . . , ulV )⊤ ∈ RV represents a vector of region weights for the lth sparsity
pattern, and L represents the number of sparse connectivity patterns. Each element of the noise
matrix Eij follows a Gaussian distribution:

                                         i.i.d
                              Eij [v, v ′ ] ∼ N (0, ϕ2i ),      1 ≤ v ≤ v ′ ≤ V.

Note that Equation (1) is a common signal-plus-noise model to decompose and factorize brain
connectivity, a specification widely used in the fMRI literature (Eavani et al., 2015; Zhao et al.,
2021; Y. Wang & Guo, 2023), and the rank-1 patterns ul u⊤  l are well-informed by the observation
that FC patterns often exhibit block-diagonal structure, as illustrated in Figure 1.
   We further assume a linear model for aijl to incorporate covariate effects and site-related het-


                                                          4
erogeneity:

                                                aijl = x⊤
                                                        ij β l + δijl ,                                               (2)

            i.i.d
where δijl ∼ N (0, σil2 ) for j = 1, . . . , ni . To complete the model, we assume that Eij is independent
of δijl for all i, j, l.
    We note that, in Equations (1) and (2), the site effects are characterized by three sources: site-
specific mean effects (via x⊤                                                     2
                                ij β l ), site-specific latent-factor variances (σil ), and site-specific noise
variance (ϕ2i ), providing flexibility in capturing site-specific heterogeneity in mean and covariance.




Figure 1: Illustration of framework decomposing a subject’s connectivity matrix into sparse rank-1
connectivity patterns {ul u⊤    L
                             l }l=1 , weighted by subject scores aijl modeled by covariates xij .


2.3    Likelihood

Under (1)–(2), Yij follows a multilinear normal model (Ohlson et al., 2013). Given the symmetry
of Yij , we derive its likelihood by considering the likelihood of yij = T (Yij ). For notational
simplicity, define sl = T (ul u⊤           p
                                    l ) ∈ R , S = [s1 ; . . . ; sL ] ∈ R
                                                                        p×L , and denote the regression coefficients

as B = [β 1 ; . . . ; β L ] ∈ Rq×L .
   Let Θ = {B, U, σil2 , ϕ2i ; i = 1, . . . , M, l = 1, . . . , L} be the parameter set. Then yij follows a
multivariate normal distribution with mean
                                                     L
                                                     X
                                µij = E(yij |xij ) =   (x⊤               ⊤
                                                         ij β l ) sl = SB xij ,
                                                         l=1

and site–specific covariance

                                         L
                                         X
                Σi = Cov(yij | xij ) =         σil2 sl s⊤    2             2             2    ⊤   2
                                                        l + ϕi Ip = Sdiag(σi1 , . . . , σiL )S + ϕi Ip ,
                                         l=1

where Ip is a p × p identity matrix. Then, the negative log–likelihood can then be written as
                                                                                                               
                                          M                           ni
                                                                    M X
                       1              1 X ni                       X    1                                      
  −log L(Θ|yij ) =       log(2π) +                    log |Σi | +               (yij − µij )⊤ Σ−1
                                                                                               i  (y ij − µ ij )  .   (3)
                       2           pn            2                           2                                 
                                            i=1                     i=1 j=1



                                                           5
2.4     Identifiability

Let Y and E denote the n × V × V tensors that are formed by stacking Yij and Eij with the
first mode corresponding to subjects, and the second and third modes corresponding to regions.
Then, our model is reformulated as a 3-way array model using CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP)
decomposition:

                                      L
                                      X
                                Y=          al ◦ ul ◦ ul + E,     al = Xβ l + δ l ,                              (4)
                                      l=1


where δ l = (δ11l , . . . , δ1n1 l , . . . , δM 1l , . . . , δM nM l )⊤ . Under the CP decomposed form, we obtain the
following result that equivalence of the likelihood implies equivalence of the parameters. The proof
naturally follows the result of Lock & Li (2018).

Theorem 1 The parameter set Θ is identifiable under the following regularity conditions:
 A.1 min(n, q, L) ≥ 2 and L < V .
 A.2 U = [u1 ; . . . ; uL ] is of full column rank, and ||ul ||2 = 1 for l = 1, . . . , L.
 A.3 The first nonzero entries of ul for l = 1, . . . , L are positive.
      2 ≥ σ 2 ≥ · · · ≥ σ 2 > 0.
 A.4 σ11     12               1L
 A.5 X is of full column rank.

A.1 is needed to meet Kruskal’s uniqueness condition that is required to establish identifiability,
and A.2-A.4 are needed because CP decomposition is not identifiable under scaling, sign flipping,
and re-ordering.

2.5     Parameter estimation

It should be noted in Section 2.2 that the objective function in (3) is not convex with respect to
all parameters, making optimization challenging. More importantly, the sparsity of ul needs to be
included into the optimization process. We develop a penalized EM algorithm for optimizing the
conditional expectation of the log-likelihood (3) for fixed L. Choosing L is discussed in Section 2.7.

2.5.1    E-step

As aij ≡ (aij1 , . . . , aijL )⊤ are latent variables in our model, the E-step updates aij by computing
its conditional expectation given the data yij and the parameter estimates from the previous step:

                                                                       ⊤ −1
                            E(aij |yij ) = Σaij |yij (Σ−1    ⊤
                                                       aij (B xij ) + S Σyij |aij yij ),                         (5)

                   2 , . . . , σ 2 ), Σ             2             −1          ⊤ −1            −1
where Σaij = diag(σi1           iL      yij |aij = ϕi · Ip , and Σaij |yij = S Σyij |aij S + Σaij .


2.5.2    M-step: Updating β l , σil2 , and ϕ2i

In the M-step, we maximize the conditional expectation of the joint log-likelihood of aij and yij .
Since the joint log-likelihood of yij and aij can be decomposed into the log-likelihood of aij and the

                                                         6
conditional log-likelihood of yij given aij , the M-step is partitioned into two optimization problems:

                             X ni
                             M X                                                                   ni
                                                                                                 M X
                                                                                                 X
        max                            Eaij |yij [log L(aij )]       and            max                    Eaij |yij [log L(yij |aij )].
             2 M,L                                                          {ul }L      2 M
{β l }L
      l=1 ,{σil }i=1,l=1     i=1 j=1                                             l=1 ,{ϕi }i=1   i=1 j=1
                                                                                                                                    (6)

where Eaij |yij represents the conditional expectation of aij given yij . For parameters {β l , σil2 , ϕ2i },
the closed-form solutions can be derived during each M-step. However, updating ul requires addi-
tional algorithmic procedure that we address in Section 2.5.3. The first optimization problem in
Equation (6) can be further separated into two parts, one updating β l and the other updating σil2 .

Updating β l .             The part of the expected complete-data log-likelihood that depends on β l is

                                                            M   n
                                                         1 XXi
                                                               (aijl − x⊤  ij β l )
                                                                                   2
                                   Q(β l ) = −                                       + constant,
                                                         2
                                                           i=1 j=1
                                                                      σil2

which is reduced to the weighted least squares problem, yielding the closed form as follows:
                                                              −1                   
                                              M X ni                  M X ni
                                            X        xij x⊤ ij 
                                                                     X       xij aijl 
                                       β
                                       b =
                                         l               2
                                                                   
                                                                                 2      .                                           (7)
                                             i=1 j=1
                                                      σ  il          i=1 j=1
                                                                               σ il


Updating σil2 .            The site-specific conditional second-moment estimator is provided by

                                      i   n
                                   1 X
                                        ((aij − B⊤ xij )(aij − B⊤ xij )⊤ + Σaij |yij ).                                             (8)
                                   ni
                                         j=1


From here, {σil2 }M
                  i=1 is obtained by taking diagonal entries of the above form.


Updating ϕ2i .             ϕ2i is updated by

                                                   i n
                                               1 X
                                  ϕ̂2i =             Eaij |yij ||yij − Saij ||22
                                              ni p
                                                     j=1
                                                      ni
                                               1     X                           1
                                        =                  ||yij − Saij ||22 +     tr(S Σaij |yij S⊤ ).                             (9)
                                              ni p                               p
                                                     j=1




                                                                       7
2.5.3   M-step: updating ul with regularization

Provided parameter updates in Sections 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, the M-step for updating U ≡ [u1 ; . . . ; uL ]
without any penalization is equivalent to

                                   ni
                                 M X
                                 X    ||Yij − UΠij U⊤ ||2F + tr((U⊤ U ⊙ U⊤ U)Σaij |yij )
                   U = argmin                                                                 ,          (10)
                          U      i=1 j=1
                                                                 4ϕ2i

         (t)
where Πij = diag(aij1 , . . . , aijL ) ∈ RL×L . Its derivation is presented in Supplementary material A.
To achieve sparsity, we propose to use L0 regularization on Us for two reasons. First, it provides
estimates with less bias compared to other regularization methods (e.g., Lasso and ridge penalties),
while still ensuring sparsity. This step is critical for harmonization, as it allows for more accurate
identification and correction of site effects. Second, L0 regularization enables us to incorporate
the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) directly into the M-step, thus avoiding the need for
computationally expensive fine-tuning of parameters.
    Specifically, when all the parameters other than U are fixed, the penalized objective guided by
BIC is:
                      ni
                    M X
                    X    ||Yij − UΠij U⊤ ||2F + tr((U⊤ U ⊙ U⊤ U)Σaij |yij )
    U
    b = argmin                                                                     + log(n) · ||U||0 .   (11)
               U     i=1 j=1
                                                      2ϕ2i

Solving Equation (11) poses two computational challenges regarding non-convexity. First, di-
rectly optimizing over L0 penalty is computationally intractable. To mitigate this issue, we
consider the Truncated
                         Lasso Penalty (TLP), a surrogate of L0 penalty expressed by ||U||0 ≈
PV PL              |uvl |
   v=1   l=1 min     τ , 1 (Shen et al., 2012). Here, τ > 0 is a tuning parameter controlling the de-
gree of approximation, and the τ value closer to 0 makes TLP close to the L0 penalty. Following the
default implementation of Shen et al. (2012) where the default τ depends on the dimensionality, we
                 p
choose τ = 0.5 · log(V L)/n as a default. Second, even the (unpenalized) objective in U contains
bilinear form UΠij U⊤ , making Equation (11) computationally challenging. We handle this by
using the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) splitting, which allows mitigating
the non-convexity by alternating convex subproblems. Specifically, we introduce an auxiliary copy
U⋆ of U and enforce the consensus constraints U = U⋆ .
    Addressing the proposed solutions to the challenges above results in the updated objective

                            ni
                          M X
                          X    ||Yij − U⋆ Πij U⊤ ||2F + tr((U⋆⊤ U ⊙ U⋆⊤ U)Σaij |yij )
          U
          b = argmin
                     U    i=1 j=1
                                                             2ϕ2i
                                       V   L                              V   L
                               log(n) X X I(|uvl | ≤ τ )          log(n) X X I(|u⋆vl | ≤ τ ) ⋆
                          +                              |uvl | +                           |uvl |,      (12)
                                  2            τ                     2             τ
                                      v=1 l=1                            v=1 l=1

subject to the U = U⋆ that we solve using ADMM by alternating updates of U and U⋆ under
the consensus constraint U = U⋆ . Analogous to the one-step update done in Shen et al. (2012),


                                                        8
we replace uv,l and u⋆v,l in the penalty term with the estimates from the previous step of the EM
                  (t−1)           ⋆,(t−1)
algorithm, i.e., uv,l     and uv,l          . The details are illustrated in Supplementary material B.

2.6   Algorithmic considerations

Altogether, our algorithm when L is fixed is summarized in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Penalized EM algorithm, when L is provided
                                       (0)           2(0)           2(0)
 1: Initialize: Initialize U(0) , aij , B(0) , σil          and ϕi         .
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . until convergence do
                                                2(t−1)          2(t−1)             (t)
 3:   E-step: Given U(t−1) ,B(t−1) , σil                 ,and ϕi         , update aij using Equation (5).
                            (t)    2(t−1)
 4:   M-step: Given aij , ϕi                , and U(t−1) update U(t) by solving Equation (12).
                            (t)             2(t−1)          (t−1)                        2(t)
 5:    M-step: Given aij , U(t) , σil          and ϕi    update B(t) and σil , using Equations (7) and
       (8).
                      (t)             (t−1)         2(t)        2(t)
 6:    M-step: Given aij , U(t) , ϕi         and σil , update ϕi using Equation (9).
 7:    Check for convergence: If ||U(t) − U(t−1) ||F < ϵ, stop the algorithm.
 8: end for
                               (t)              (t)
 9: Normalize: Normalize ul with ||ul ||2 = 1 and make corresponding adjustments to B and
     2
    σil .
10: Return: Θb = {U(t) , B(t) , σ 2(t) , ϕ2(t) }
                                  il      i


We note that each step of updating U in the penalized EM could lead to a local minimum, especially
when L is high. To improve algorithmic stability, we find that implementing the unpenalized EM
(i.e., solving Equation (10)) initialized with higher-order singular value decomposition (De Lath-
auwer et al., 2000) and using the estimates as the initial estimates of the penalized EM algorithm
significantly improves the convergence behavior. In addition to this, we find that an annealing
strategy that gradually increases the penalty in Equation (12) from 0 (unpenalized EM) to log(n)
at each iteration of the EM further mitigates the local minimum problem.

2.7   Selection of L

Up to this point, we have assumed that L in our model is known. To choose L from the data,
we use the extended BIC to choose L (J. Chen & Chen, 2008). Specifically, the extended BIC is
defined as:
                                     ni
                                   M X
                                   X
                    b = −2
               EBIC(Θ)                         log L(Θ|y
                                                     b ij ) + log(n) · df(Θ)
                                                                          b + 2γ log(p) · df(Θ),
                                                                                             b              (13)
                                    i=1 j=1


where df(Θ)b = qL + M L + M + ||U||  b 0 , the number of nonzero elements of the parameter set.
0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 is chosen by user, and we set γ = 0.5 as a default. If p is deemed to be high, higher
values of up to γ = 1 can be used. Alternative strategies may be used, such as site-stratified
likelihood cross-validation to measure bias-variance tradeoff.



                                                              9
2.8    Harmonization

After estimating parameters, we construct the harmonized data by removing site-specific means,
normalizing site-specific variances for each latent factor, and rescaling the residual variances. Note
that, if xij includes biological covariates zij and site dummy variables, then x⊤ ij β l can be rewritten
         ⊤
                                       PM
as αl +zij θ l +γil with the constraint i=1 γil = 0. Since the site-specific heterogeneity is embedded
in both the latent factors and the residual noise, we harmonize them as

                                 (h)
                  (h)       σl                                                           (h)    ϕ(h) b
                 aijl =           (âijl − α̂l − z⊤                         ⊤
                                                  ij θ̂ l − γ̂il ) + α̂l + zij θ̂ l ,   Eij =        Eij ,   (14)
                             σ̂il                                                                ϕ̂i
              q PM                          q PM
                            2                           2
       (h)         i=1 ni σ̂il                 i=1 ni ϕ̂i
where σl =            n          , ϕ(h) =          n        . The harmonized data is therefore given by

                                                       L
                                               (h)        (h)            (h)
                                                       X
                                             Yij =       aijl ûl û⊤
                                                                    l + Eij .
                                                       l=1


3     Simulation studies

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our model through two simulation studies designed
to validate theoretical properties, assess robustness, and demonstrate practical utility.

3.1    Simulation 1




            Figure 2: True U ∈ R50×5 for scenarios 1 and 2 used in simulation studies.


                                                               10
Simulation 1 evaluates parameter estimation under varying sample sizes (n = 100, 200, . . . , 500),
when true L is specified correctly. We specify M = 2, L = 5, V = 50 (p = 1275), and q = 4.
We considered two possible scenarios of U as illustrated in Figure 4: (i) Scenario 1 is the case
where there are no overlapping entries across V and 20% of the entries are nonzero, and scenario
2 has overlapping elements and 40% of the entries are nonzero. Each nonzero entries for both
scenarios were generated once from Uniform(0.5, 1.0) and multiplied by either 1 or -1 randomly,
then each column of U was normalized to have unit norm. We used 4 covariates in total, consisting
of two continuous biological covariates and two site-specific intercepts. The biological covariates
were generated from N (0, 1) and the corresponding regression coefficients were also generated from
N (0, 1) and kept fixed throughout the simulation. Site-specific intercepts for each l were fixed
to be 0.3 for site 1 and -0.3 for site 2 for every l = 1, . . . , 5. For variance components, we set
  2 = 1, σ 2 = 2, . . . , σ 2 = 5 for site 1 and σ 2 = 5, σ 2 = 4, . . . , σ 2 = 1 for site 2. Lastly, we
σ11           11              15                        21      22           25
set ϕ21 = 1.2 and ϕ22 = 0.8. It yielded the median of σ 2 parameters divided by the median of ϕ2
parameters equal to 3, and we note that it is considerably lower than the fit from the real data
analysis in Section 4 in which the ratio was nearly 25.
    For each sample size, we repeated the simulation B = 1000 times. After fitting the model, the
column order as the sign of U       b were reordered based on the correlation between U
                                                                                      b and U, and other
parameters were re-ordered accordingly.
    Due to the lack of statistical methods addressing the same problem, we considered two related
methods as competitors: (i) (SLACC-True) SLACC with true U provided, which serves as a
benchmark, and (ii) (SLACC-NoPen) SLACC without penalization in the M-step in updating
U. To compare the performances, we use the following metrics. We first compare mean square error
(MSE) for B, {σil2 }2,5             2 2
                                                                                             PB      b (b)
                        i=1,l=1 , {ϕi }i=1 . For example, the MSE for U is computed by 1/B ·   b=1 ||U −
                                                                      b
                                                                                               B
U||2F where U    b (b) is the estimated U from the bth simulation. The variance (1/B ·               b (b) −
                                                                                             P
                                                                                               b=1 ||U
PB        (b)      2                     2
   b=1 U /B||F ) as well as bias (defined as MSE−variance) are reported. Second, we evaluated
sensitivity and specificity of U.      b Sensitivity is defined as the proportion that Ub (b) captures the
true nonzero indices out of the number of nonzero entries of U, and specificity is defined as the
proportion that U     b (b) captures the true zero indices out of the number of zero entries of U. Note
that, trivially, the sensitivity and specificity of SLACC-True are both 100% and the values for
SLACC-NoPen are 100% and 0% respectively.
    Figure 3 shows the results in Simulation 1. The overall patterns look similar in both scenarios,
and we see a clearly decreasing MSE as sample size increases bounded above the performance of
SLACC-true in all parameters. SLACC achieved consistently lower MSE than SLACC-NoPen in
estimating U, while the difference in performance on other parameters become marginal as sample
size increases. We also note that, attributed to the surrogate L0 penalization, the bias in SLACC’s
parameter estimation was similar to SLACC-NoPen or often lower (e.g., in estimating ϕ2i ). Also,
the surrogate L0 penalty in estimating U achieved high sensitivity and specificity in all n except
for n = 100, which imply the case where the low signal-to-residual-noise (e.g., B and σil2 in relative
to ϕ2i ) impedes the estimation of U.



                                                    11
Figure 3: Results of Simulation 1. The left and right columns describe scenarios 1 and 2, respec-
tively. The first 4 rows describe MSE (red+blue), bias2 (red) and variance (blue). The last row
shows sensitivity and specificity of the estimated U.



                                               12
3.2    Simulation 2

Simulation 2 evaluates the EBIC approach in selecting the true L = 5 used in Simulation 1. We
fit the model with varying L in the grid L ∈ {2, 3, . . . , 10} and extracted EBIC for each fit. The
results of estimated L over 200 simulations are reported in Figure 6 of Supplementary material
C. As expected, as n increases, the distribution of the chosen L gets closer to the true L in both
scenarios. Similar to the sensitivity/specificity results discussed in Simulation 1, the BIC criterion is
shown to be conservative depending on the signal-to-residual-noise ratio or sample size. Compared
to scenario 1 where ul were orthogonal and the nonzero indices were not overlapping, a higher n
was needed to consistently recover the true L as shown in Scenario 2.

4     Data analysis

4.1    Data preparation and preprocessing

We use preprocessed resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Ex-
change (ABIDE) (Di Martino et al., 2014) to empirically evaluate our model’s performance. ABIDE
is a multi-site consortium providing rs-fMRI data from 408 subjects with Autism Spectrum Disor-
der (ASD) and 476 controls. Due to the lack of prior coordination between sites, scan parameters,
scanner types, and diagnostic/assessment protocols varied across sites. The sample size for each
site ranged from 21 (CALTECH) to 169 (NYU). In addition to the existing evidence of site effects
on functional connectivity (Yu et al., 2018), we also note that the number of scans per person
varied substantially by sites, ranging from 78 (OHSU) to 296 time points (UM), which serves as a
design-based evidence of site effects in variances because FC is a statistical estimate whose variance
depends on the number of time points.
    We used the ABIDE dataset preprocessed using the Configurable Pipeline for the Analysis of
Connectomes (CPAC), which includes slice-timing correction, motion realignment, and intensity
normalization. Further preprocessing details are provided in Craddock et al. (2013). The fMRI
time-series for a set of regions of interest (ROIs) were obtained from the Harvard-Oxford (HO) atlas
(Desikan et al., 2006; Frazier et al., 2005), which consists of V = 110 ROIs that we subsequently
map to Yeo’s 7-network parcellation (Yeo et al., 2011) plus the subcortical network. The resulting
8 functional networks include the Visual Network (VN), Subcortical Network (Scor), Somatomotor
Network (SMN), Salience/Ventral Attention Network (SN/VAN), Limbic Network (LN), Fron-
toparietal Control Network (FPCN), Dorsal Attention Network (DAN) and Default Mode Network
(DMN).
    We excluded 38 subjects with incomplete brain coverage and the CMU site due to its limited
sample size (5 subjects). The final sample comprises 845 subjects across 16 sites. We then computed
Fisher-transformed Pearson correlation matrices from the fMRI time-series data. Since our goal
is to understand the individual differences in connectivity, we removed the sample mean across
subjects for each edge as a preprocessing step. The diagonal entries were set to 0 and were not
used in estimating ϕ2i .



                                                   13
4.2   Results

We included six biological covariates in all methods: age, age2 , sex, diagnosis, age × sex, and
age × diagnosis. We split the data into two folds consisting of 591 (70%) training and 254 (30%)
test subjects, stratified by each study site. We fit our model to the training data, with L = 73
selected by EBIC. About 68.2% of the entries in U             b were 0, which is shown in Figure 4. Our
analysis reveals that the covariate-dependent latent patterns seem to vary across within-network
and between-network structures. For example, a subset of regions in visual network (VN) had
a noticeable similarity in latent patterns, and these seemed to be related to the salience/ventral
attention network (SN/VAN) as well as frontoparietal control network (FPCN). At the same time,
some latent patterns are very sparse and concentrated on a very few regions not clearly aligned
with network structure.
    We used the estimated parameters to extract the latent subject scores âijl for both the training
and test data. Then, using the estimated parameters, we further constructed the ‘batch-free’ model
                                         (h)
with the parameters {ûl , θ̂ l , α̂l , σl ϕ(h) }L
                                                 l=1 defined in Section 2.8, and obtained the corrected latent
                                  ⋆
subject scores, denoted by âijl , for both training and test data. We calculated two F test statistics
for each edge to test (i) equality in means across sites and (ii) equality of variance across sites using
absolute residuals as in Levene’s test (Carroll & Schneider, 1985).




Figure 4: Estimated U (L = 73) using the training data (n = 591), with the column orders obtained
by hierarchical clustering.

   As seen in Figure 5, SLACC identified latent factors in training data that are highly associated
with site effects in means and variances, and a few of them exhibited huge effects (i.e., F > 10
in training data). After harmonization, most statistics shrink toward the null level. Although the
average F statistic lower than 1 (expected value of the F distribution under the null) may occur

                                                     14
Figure 5: F test statistic for measuring mean and variance heterogeneity across sites, using both
training (first row) and test data (second row). The dotted horizontal line is the expected value of
the null F distribution (i.e., no site effects). The solid line is the 45 degree line.


due to overfitting to the training data, our results on the test data also show that most F statistics
are reduced closer to the nominal level as well, which is more evident for the latent features with
large F statistics before harmonization.
    We further compared the edge-level harmonization performance of SLACC to ComBat (Fortin et
al., 2018), which adjusts feature-wise means and variances using a normal–inverse-gamma prior and
uses Empirical Bayes for estimation. For ComBat, we used ComBatFamily (https://github.com/
andy1764/ComBatFamily, ver. 0.2.1) to fit the model on the training data and to harmonize the
test data. On the edge level, the median F for mean and variance were 1.40 and 1.08 for SLACC,
compared to 1.25 and 1.15 for ComBat. This suggests that SLACC more effectively harmonizes
variances, whereas ComBat more effectively harmonizes means. Lastly, we evaluate how well our
method preserves biological variations. For each harmonized test data, we extracted p values for
each edge by using the six covariates. ComBat had 7.58% of the p values less than 0.05, and SLACC
had 7.40%. While ComBat was slightly more effective in preserving biological variations, we also
note that biological covariates including age and sex were correlated with sites in the ABIDE data,

                                                 15
which might have confounded in the harmonization step (Bridgeford et al., 2025).

5   Discussion

In this paper, we propose SLACC, a novel statistical method for decomposing brain connectivity
data into sparse rank-1 latent patterns and covariate-dependent subject scores in both mean and
variance. We studied the identifiability of the model parameters under mild regulatory conditions
and proposed a surrogate L0 penalized EM algorithm guided by the BIC, ensuring less biased
parameter estimation while avoiding computationally expensive tuning. In our applications in a
multi-site brain connectivity study, it enables modeling site effects in three different ways, improving
interpretability and model-based understanding of site effects. By leveraging low-rank, sparse rep-
resentations of connectivity matrices within the probabilistic modeling framework, SLACC captures
and corrects artificial site effects through latent factors, preserving the underlying brain network
structure. Incorporating low-rank structure and regularization reduces model complexity, leading
to more reliable localization and correction of site effects.
    Our work bridges recent advances in brain connectivity modeling for addressing popular ‘batch
effects’ problems in neuroimaging. Recent work on blind source separation for brain connectivity
(Y. Wang & Guo, 2023) models its sparse latent patterns while allowing each latent patterns have
rank greater than 1. However, establishing identifiability and incorporating covariate effects in a
generative model framework has been limited. A related approach aimed to adopt covariate-driven
factorization of brain connectivity, but adopting sparsity of latent patterns in high dimension is
non-trivial (Zhao et al., 2021; Park, 2025). By restricting latent patterns to be rank-1, our method
achieves (i) identification of model parameters (ii) sparsity directly enforced in estimating ul s, and
(iii) flexibility in modeling latent subject scores. Moreover, our model for latent subject scores is
grounded in a linear modeling framework, which can be extended to more complex settings (e.g.,
longitudinal designs).
    The proposed model has some room for extension. First, our assumption that connectivity data
follow a multivariate normal distribution does not guarantee that the harmonized connectivity ma-
trices are positive semidefinite, which is a statistical property in brain connectivity derived from
fMRI BOLD time series in addition to symmetry considered in this paper. We note, however,
that (i) most brain-wide association studies (BWASs) rely on univariate correlational analysis of
edge-level connectivity and a behavioral outcome and do not explicitly utilize the positive semidef-
initeness, and (ii) not all brain connectivity matrices are positive semidefinite (e.g., structural
connectivity). For these reasons, we focused on a general setting that enforces symmetry and mod-
eled structured relationships. When ensuring positive definiteness is important, a simple remedy
would be to truncate negative eigenvalues to 0 after applying SLACC. Another direction is to in-
corporate alternative distributional assumptions (e.g., Wishart distributions) or log-link functions
to model latent factors. Such adaptations, however, may compromise the computational efficiency
(e.g., closed-form solutions in the estimation) and interpretability (e.g., mean/variance/covariance
specification of site effects) offered by the current normal distribution framework. Second, SLACC


                                                  16
decomposes connectivity matrices into a set of rank-1 matrices of latent patterns, which may limit
the method’s ability to recover neural circuits with complex topological structures or spatial pat-
terns that extend beyond a rank-1 structure (Y. Wang & Guo, 2023). A potential extension of
the SLACC framework could involve adopting more flexible higher-rank representations to better
capture such complexity. Nevertheless, this extension would require addressing challenges such as
ensuring identifiability. Third, uncertainty quantification and hypothesis testing for model param-
eters in latent subject scores is not straightforward, and it might require conditioning on ûl s being
known, as Zhao & Zhao (2025) also noted.

Software availability

The R package for implementing SLACC is publicly available at https://github.com/junjypark/
SLACC.

Declaration of competing interests

None.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Dr. Piotr Zwiernik (University of Toronto) and Dr. Lindsay D. Oliver
(Centre for Addiction and Mental Health) for their helpful suggestions.

Funding

RZ was partially supported by the University of Toronto’s Data Sciences Institute through the
doctoral student fellowship. ET was partially supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada under grant RGPIN-2023-04727, the University of Toronto Data Sci-
ence Institute, and the University of Toronto McLaughlin Centre. JYP was partially supported by
the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under grant RGPIN-2022-04831,
the University of Toronto Data Science Institute, and the Connaught Fund. The computing re-
sources were enabled in part by support provided by University of Toronto and the Digital Research
Alliance of Canada.

References

Biswal, B., Zerrin Yetkin, F., Haughton, V. M., & Hyde, J. S. (1995). Functional connectivity in the
  motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine,
  34 (4), 537–541.

Bridgeford, E. W., Powell, M., Kiar, G., Noble, S., Chung, J., Panda, S., . . . others (2025).
  When no answer is better than a wrong answer: A causal perspective on batch effects. Imaging
  Neuroscience, 3 , imag a 00458.



                                                  17
Cai, B., Zille, P., Stephen, J. M., Wilson, T. W., Calhoun, V. D., & Wang, Y. P. (2017). Estimation
  of dynamic sparse connectivity patterns from resting state fMRI. IEEE Transactions on Medical
  Imaging, 37 (5), 1224–1234.
Carroll, R. J., & Schneider, H. (1985). A note on Levene’s tests for equality of variances. Statistics
  & Probability Letters, 3 (4), 191–194.
Chen, A. A., Beer, J. C., Tustison, N. J., Cook, P. A., Shinohara, R. T., Shou, H., & Initiative,
 A. D. N. (2022). Mitigating site effects in covariance for machine learning in neuroimaging data.
 Human Brain Mapping, 43 (4), 1179–1195.
Chen, A. A., Srinivasan, D., Pomponio, R., Fan, Y., Nasrallah, I. M., Resnick, S. M., . . . others
 (2022). Harmonizing functional connectivity reduces scanner effects in community detection.
 NeuroImage, 256 , 119198.
Chen, J., & Chen, Z. (2008). Extended bayesian information criteria for model selection with large
 model spaces. Biometrika, 95 (3), 759–771.
Craddock, C., Sikka, S., Cheung, B., Khanuja, R., Ghosh, S. S., Yan, C., . . . others (2013). Towards
  automated analysis of connectomes: The configurable pipeline for the analysis of connectomes
  (c-pac). Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 42 (10.3389).
De Lathauwer, L., De Moor, B., & Vandewalle, J. (2000). A multilinear singular value decomposi-
  tion. SIAM journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 21 (4), 1253–1278.
Desikan, R. S., Ségonne, F., Fischl, B., Quinn, B. T., Dickerson, B. C., Blacker, D., . . . others
  (2006). An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans
  into gyral based regions of interest. NeuroImage, 31 (3), 968–980.
Di Martino, A., Yan, C.-G., Li, Q., Denio, E., Castellanos, F. X., Alaerts, K., . . . others (2014).
  The autism brain imaging data exchange: towards a large-scale evaluation of the intrinsic brain
  architecture in autism. Molecular Psychiatry, 19 (6), 659–667.
Eavani, H., Satterthwaite, T. D., Filipovych, R., Gur, R. E., Gur, R. C., & Davatzikos, C. (2015).
  Identifying sparse connectivity patterns in the brain using resting-state fMRI. NeuroImage, 105 ,
  286–299.
Fortin, J.-P., Cullen, N., Sheline, Y. I., Taylor, W. D., Aselcioglu, I., Cook, P. A., . . . others (2018).
  Harmonization of cortical thickness measurements across scanners and sites. NeuroImage, 167 ,
  104–120.
Fortin, J.-P., Parker, D., Tunç, B., Watanabe, T., Elliott, M. A., Ruparel, K., . . . others (2017).
  Harmonization of multi-site diffusion tensor imaging data. NeuroImage, 161 , 149–170.
Fox, M. D., & Greicius, M. (2010). Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity.
  Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 4 , 1443.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E. (2005).
  The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102 (27), 9673–9678.
Frazier, J. A., Chiu, S., Breeze, J. L., Makris, N., Lange, N., Kennedy, D. N., . . . others (2005).
  Structural brain magnetic resonance imaging of limbic and thalamic volumes in pediatric bipolar
  disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162 (7), 1256–1265.

                                                    18
Friston, K. J., Frith, C. D., Liddle, P. F., & Frackowiak, R. S. (1993). Functional connectivity:
  the principal-component analysis of large (PET) data sets. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
  Metabolism, 13 (1), 5–14.

Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2003). Functional connectivity in the
  resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 100 (1), 253–258.

Johnson, W. E., Li, C., & Rabinovic, A. (2007). Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression
  data using empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics, 8 (1), 118–127.

Lock, E. F., & Li, G. (2018). Supervised multiway factorization. Electronic Journal of Statistics,
  12 (1), 1150.

Marrelec, G., Krainik, A., Duffau, H., Pélégrini-Issac, M., Lehéricy, S., Doyon, J., & Benali, H.
 (2006). Partial correlation for functional brain interactivity investigation in functional MRI.
 NeuroImage, 32 (1), 228–237.

Ohlson, M., Ahmad, M. R., & Von Rosen, D. (2013). The multilinear normal distribution: Intro-
 duction and some basic properties. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 113 , 37–47.

Park, H. G. (2025). Bayesian estimation of covariate assisted principal regression for brain func-
  tional connectivity. Biostatistics, 26 (1), kxae023.

Salvador, R., Suckling, J., Coleman, M. R., Pickard, J. D., Menon, D., & Bullmore, E. (2005).
  Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain. Cerebral
  Cortex , 15 (9), 1332–1342.

Shen, X., Pan, W., & Zhu, Y. (2012). Likelihood-based selection and sharp parameter estimation.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107 (497), 223–232.

Sun, W. W., & Li, L. (2017). STORE: sparse tensor response regression and neuroimaging analysis.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18 (135), 1–37.

Van Den Heuvel, M. P., & Pol, H. E. H. (2010). Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-
  state fMRI functional connectivity. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 20 (8), 519–534.

Wang, Y., & Guo, Y. (2023). LOCUS: A regularized blind source separation method with low-
 rank structure for investigating brain connectivity. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 17 (2),
 1307–1332.

Wang, Z., Alahmadi, A., Zhu, D., & Li, T. (2015). Brain functional connectivity analysis us-
 ing mutual information. In 2015 IEEE global conference on signal and information processing
 (GlobalSIP) (pp. 542–546).

Yeo, B. T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., . . .
  others (2011). The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional
  connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology.

Yu, M., Linn, K. A., Cook, P. A., Phillips, M. L., McInnis, M., Fava, M., . . . Sheline, Y. I.
  (2018). Statistical harmonization corrects site effects in functional connectivity measurements
  from multi-site fMRI data. Human Brain Mapping, 39 (11), 4213–4227.


                                                19
Zhang, R., Chen, L., Oliver, L. D., Voineskos, A. N., & Park, J. Y. (2024). SAN: Mitigating
  spatial covariance heterogeneity in cortical thickness data collected from multiple scanners or
  sites. Human Brain Mapping, 45 (7), e26692.

Zhang, R., Oliver, L. D., Voineskos, A. N., & Park, J. Y. (2023). RELIEF: A structured multivariate
  approach for removal of latent inter-scanner effects. Imaging Neuroscience, 1 , 1–16.

Zhao, Y., Wang, B., Mostofsky, S. H., Caffo, B. S., & Luo, X. (2021). Covariate assisted principal
  regression for covariance matrix outcomes. Biostatistics, 22 (3), 629–645.

Zhao, Y., & Zhao, Y. (2025). Covariance-on-covariance regression. Biometrics, 81 (3), ujaf097.

Zonneveld, H. I., Pruim, R. H., Bos, D., Vrooman, H. A., Muetzel, R. L., Hofman, A., . . . others
  (2019). Patterns of functional connectivity in an aging population: The Rotterdam Study.
  NeuroImage, 189 , 432–444.




                                                20
                                         Supplementary materials

A   Derivation of Equation (10)

Recall our model is summarized by Yij = UΠij U⊤ + Eij , with Πij = diag(aij1 , . . . , aijL ) and
T (Eij ) ∼ N 0, ϕ2i Ip . Up to an additive constant, the conditional negative log-likelihood is
                      


                                                          1
                          − log p(Yij |aij ; U) ∝             ||T(Yij − UΠij U⊤ )||22 .              (15)
                                                         2ϕ2i

Here, we optimize an equivalent form using a Frobenius norm: ||T (M)| |22 = κ · ||M| |2F , where κ
is a constant that depends only on the choice of T (·). Since κ does not depend on U, it does not
affect the optimizer. Equation (15) is equivalent (up to constants) to

                                                            1
                           − log p(Yij |aij ; U) ∝              ||Yij − UΠij U⊤ ||2F .               (16)
                                                           4ϕ2i

   As a preliminary step, let âij = E(aij |yij ) and Qij = Cov(aij |yij ) be the posterior mean and
covariance from the E-step. Write

                    aij = âij + dij ,       E(dij |yij ) = 0,        E(dij d⊤
                                                                             ij |yij ) = Qij .


Define Π
       b ij = diag(âij1 , . . . , âijL ) so that Πij = Π
                                                         b ij + diag(dij ). Then, consider the conditional
expectation of the squared Frobenius loss in Equation (16):

         E[||Yij − UΠij U⊤ ||2F | yij ] = E[||Yij − UΠ
                                                     b ij U⊤ − Udiag(dij )U⊤ ||2 | yij ]
                                                                               F
                                                      b ij U⊤ ||2 + E[||Udiag(dij )U⊤ ||2 | yij ].
                                           = ||Yij − UΠ                                              (17)
                                                                F                       F


Note that the cross-term vanishes because E(dij |yij ) = 0.
   Now, it is sufficient to obtain the second term of Equation (17). Using Udiag(dij )U⊤ =
PL             ⊤
  l=1 dijl ul ul , we obtain

                                         L X
                                         X L
               ||Udiag(dij )U⊤ ||2F =                dijl dijl′ (u⊤      2   ⊤    ⊤     ⊤
                                                                  l ul′ ) = dij (U U ⊙ U U)dij .
                                         l=1 l′ =1


Taking expectation and using E(dij d⊤
                                    ij |yij ) = Qij yields


                        E[||Udiag(dij )U⊤ ||2F | yij ] = tr((U⊤ U ⊙ U⊤ U) Qij ).                     (18)

Combining (16), (17), and (18), the M-step objective for updating U reduces to Equation (10).




                                                          21
B     Details of the ADMM algorithm for U in the penalized M-step

B.1    Penalized M-step objective for updating U via Equation (12)

Let Qij = Qi = Σaij |yij ∈ RL×L denote the conditional covariance of aij in the E-step. In our
implementation, Qi is site-specific and does not depend on j. Define weights wij = 1/ϕ2i and
wsum = M
        P Pni
          i=1   j=1 wij . Then the penalized M-step for U (after one-step linearization of the TLP
penalty) can be written as

                     ni
                   M X
                   X    wij
           min                    {||Yij − U⋆ Πij U⊤ ||2F + tr((U⋆⊤ U ⊙ U⋆⊤ U)Qi )}
           U,U⋆               2
                   i=1 j=1

                     + λ||C(t−1) ⊙ U||1 + λ||C⋆(t−1) ⊙ U⋆ ||1         subject to        U = U⋆ ,      (19)

where λ = log(n)/2 in our paper. Following Equation (12), the (v, l)th entry of C(t−1) are
1     (t−1)
τ I(|uvl    | ≤ τ ), and the entries for C⋆(t−1) are defined accordingly.

B.2    ADMM splitting and augmented Lagrangian

To handle the nonsmooth L1 terms and the symmetry constraint U = U⋆ , we introduce auxiliary
variables Z and Z⋆ and impose U = Z, U⋆ = Z⋆ , and U = U⋆ . Let f (U, U⋆ ) denote the smooth
part of (19). We solve

                        min         f (U, U⋆ ) + λ||C(t−1) ⊙ Z||1 + λ||C⋆(t−1) ⊙ Z⋆ ||1
                     U,U⋆ ,Z,Z⋆

                    such that       U = Z,          U⋆ = Z⋆ ,   U = U⋆ .

Using the scaled ADMM form, we introduce dual variables W, W⋆ for (U − Z) and (U⋆ − Z⋆ ),
and Λ for (U − U⋆ ). With penalty parameters ρ > 0 and η > 0, the scaled augmented Lagrangian
becomes

             Lρ,η =f (U, U⋆ ) + λ||C(t−1) ⊙ Z||1 + λ||C⋆(t−1) ⊙ Z⋆ ||1
                      ρ                     ρ                        η
                   + ||U − Z + W||2F + ||U⋆ − Z⋆ + W⋆ ||2F + ||U − U⋆ + Λ||2F .                       (20)
                      2                     2                        2

B.3    Closed-form updates for U and U⋆

At iteration k, updating U reduces to solving

                                        ρ                        η
         U(k+1) = argmin f (U, U⋆(k) ) + ||U − Z(k) + W(k) ||2F + ||U − U⋆(k) + Λ(k) ||2F .           (21)
                     U                  2                        2

Let GU ⋆ and HU ⋆ be defined by

                   X ni
                   M X                                                     ni
                                                                         M X
                                                                         X
                                          ⋆⊤    ⋆
          GU ⋆ =             wij Πij (U        U ) Πij    and   HU ⋆ =             wij Yij U⋆ Πij ,
                   i=1 j=1                                               i=1 j=1




                                                         22
                                                                 1                   PM Pni
and define the aggregated conditional second-moment matrix Q = wsum                    i=1   j=1 wij Qi .   Then
the optimality condition for (21) yields the linear system

                        U(k+1) KU ⋆ = HU ⋆ + ρ(Z(k) − W(k) ) + η(U⋆(k) − Λ(k) ),

where

                           KU ⋆ = GU ⋆ + (ρ + η)IL + wsum (U⋆(k)⊤ U⋆(k) ⊙ Q).

Therefore,

                       U(k+1) = (HU ⋆ + ρ(Z(k) − W(k) ) + η(U⋆(k) − Λ(k) ))K−1
                                                                            U⋆.


   The U⋆ -update is analogous with U and U⋆ swapped.

B.4     Soft-thresholding updates and dual steps

Updating Z reduces to the following objective:

                                                        ρ
                      Z(k+1) = argmin λ||C(t−1) ⊙ Z||1 + ||U(k+1) − Z + W(k) ||2F ,
                                  Z                     2

which has the elementwise soft-thresholding solution

              (k+1)                      (k+1)       (k)
             Zvl      = S(λ/ρ)C (t−1)(Uvl        + Wvl ),       Sκ (x) = sign(x) · max(|x| − κ, 0).
                                vl



The update for Z⋆ is identical with (U⋆ , W⋆ , C⋆(t−1) ).
  The dual variables are updated by

                                     W(k+1) = W(k) + U(k+1) − Z(k+1) ,
                                     W⋆(k+1) = W⋆(k) + U⋆(k+1) − Z⋆(k+1) ,
                                      Λ(k+1) = Λ(k) + U(k+1) − U⋆(k+1) .




                                                           23
C   Supplementary figures for Simulation 2 results




Figure 6: Evaluation of the EBIC criterion in choosing L in simulation studies. Each simulation
was repeated 200 times. Each dotted curve and gray dot denote the EBIC curve and its minimum
for each simulated data, and the solid curve represents the pointwise average across simulations.




                                               24
