Serveur Académique Lausannois SERVAL serval.unil.ch

Author Manuscript
Faculty of Biology and Medicine Publication
This paper has been peer-reviewed but does not include the final publisher
proof-corrections or journal pagination.

Published in final edited form as:

  Title: Auditory perceptual decision-making based on semantic
  categorization of environmental sounds.
  Authors: De Lucia M, Tzovara A, Bernasconi F, Spierer L, Murray MM
  Journal: NeuroImage
  Year: 2012 Apr 15
  Issue: 60
  Volume: 3
  Pages: 1704-15
  DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.131




In the absence of a copyright statement, users should assume that standard copyright protection applies, unless the article contains
an explicit statement to the contrary. In case of doubt, contact the journal publisher to verify the copyright status of an article.
Auditory perceptual decision-making based on semantic categorization of environmental sounds


Marzia De Lucia1,2, Athina Tzovara1,2, Fosco Bernasconi3, Lucas Spierer3, Micah M. Murray1,2,3,4

1
Electroencephalography Brain Mapping Core, Center for Biomedical Imaging of Lausanne and
Geneva, Switzerland, 2 Department of Radiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV),
CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland, 3 Neuropsychology and Neurorehabilitation Service, Department of
Clinical Neurosciences, CHUV, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Department of Hearing and Speech
Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA


KEYWORDS: Perceptual decision-making; single-trial electroencephalography; decoding


Corresponding author:


Marzia De Lucia (email: marzia.de-lucia@chuv.ch)
Tel 0041 21 314 68 28; Fax 0041 21 314 46 45
Electroencephalography Brain Mapping Core
Lemanic Center for Biomedical Imaging
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois , BH 07 081 1
Department of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne
1011 Lausanne Switzerland



Highlights:


       Multivariate EEG decoding determined latencies when the brain discriminated semantic
        categories of sounds.
       Environmental sound categorization occurs during early stages (starting at ~116ms post-
        stimulus onset) and independently of behavioral proficiency.
       Perceptual decision-making of environmental sounds takes place at ~270ms post-stimulus
        onset.




                                                   1
Abstract


Discriminating complex sounds relies on multiple stages of differential brain activity. The specific
roles of these stages and their links to perception were the focus of the present study. We presented
250ms duration sounds of living and man-made objects while recording 160-channel
electroencephalography (EEG). Subjects categorized each sound as that of a living, man-made or
unknown item. We tested whether/when the brain discriminates between sound categories even
when not transpiring behaviorally. We applied a single-trial classifier that identified voltage
topographies and latencies at which brain responses are most discriminative. For sounds that the
subjects could not categorize, we could successfully decode the semantic category based on
differences in voltage topographies during the 116-174ms post-stimulus period. Sounds that were
correctly categorized as that of a living or man-made item by the same subjects exhibited two
periods of differences in voltage topographies at the single-trial level. Subjects exhibited differential
activity before the sound ended (starting at 112ms) and on a separate period at ~270ms post-
stimulus onset. Because each of these periods could be used to reliably decode semantic categories,
we interpreted the first as being related to an implicit tuning for sound representations and the
second as being linked to perceptual decision-making processes. Collectively, our results show that
the brain discriminates environmental sounds during early stages and independently of behavioral
proficiency and that explicit sound categorization requires a subsequent processing stage.




1. Introduction


We are constantly immersed in noisy environments where accurate and quick sound identification is
essential for daily activities such as communicating and navigating. We recognize, for example,
whether the sound was emitted by a machine (i.e. telephone ringing) or produced by a living source
(i.e. a dog barking) even in the absence of visual cues and in noisy contexts. Correct sound
identification depends on the amount of available sensory evidence, on the ability to compare
different options within a range of possibilities and often implies making a choice, i.e. a perceptual
decision.


Investigating how sensory information is gathered and used to form a decision variable represents an
active field of research in both monkeys and humans (reviewed in Gold and Shadlen, 2007 and
Heekeren et al., 2008). In both visual and somatosensory domains, several studies emphasize a
causal link between sensory evidence accumulated in low-level cortices and perceptual decision-
making. The idea is that even if the actual decision is made by higher-level cortices by integrating

                                                   2
accumulated sensory evidence, stimulus identification can already be inferred from activity in early
sensory areas. During a vibrotactile discrimination experiment, single-unit recordings in
somatosensory cortex predicted whether monkeys could perceive a difference in the stimulation
frequency (Salinas et al., 2000). In the same kind of tasks, Romo et al. (Romo et al., 2003)
demonstrated the role of prefrontal medial and premotor cortices in forming the decision initially
driven by evidence in somatosensory areas (see also Hernandez et al., 2002; de Lafuente et al.,
2005). The same pattern of sequential stages has been repeatedly shown in the visual domain. Here,
a popular paradigm involves discriminating the direction of motion of a field of moving dots
(Newsome et al., 1989; Britten et al., 1992; Shadlen et al., 1996; Kim and Shadlen, 1999; Bennur and
Gold, 2011) during which activity in area MT could predict motion discrimination, whereas activity in
lateral intraparietal area (LIP), the frontal eye-field (FEF) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) was directly related to forming the decision. More recently, perceptual decision-making in
the visual domain has been investigated with complex stimuli and tasks involving perceptual and
semantic categorization (Philiastides et al., 2006a; Philiastides et al., 2006b; Ratcliff et al., 2009;
Simanova et al., 2010; Murphy et al. 2011).


To date, few studies have examined perceptual decision-making in the auditory domain and were
mainly based on the discrimination of phonemes (Binder et al., 2004; Kaiser et al., 2006). Binder et al.
carried out a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment where participants were
asked to identify speech sounds masked by varying levels of noise (Binder et al 2004). Results
showed that activity within a cortical region anterior to primary auditory cortex predicted
performance accuracy, whereas activity in the inferior frontal cortex was related to response time.
With more emphasis on the temporal dynamics of perceptual decision-making in the auditory
domain, Kaiser et al. showed differential activity in the gamma frequency band starting at 120ms
post-stimulus onset when comparing different sounds patterns, and differential activity between
easy and difficult decisions at later stages of sound processing (Kaiser et al 2006). However, localizing
or at least distinguishing the cortical regions underlying these sequential stages in humans remains
still unexplored in speech identification and even more in the context of complex sound
identification.


Recently, the analysis of auditory event-related potentials (AEPs) in response to complex stimuli
revealed that sound processing starts unfolding at 70ms post-stimulus onset for living/man-made
categorizations (Murray et al. 2006) and that finer semantic analysis takes place along later
discontinuous temporal periods including the discrimination between human and animal voices (De
Lucia et al. 2010a), and musical and other man-made sounds (De Lucia et al. 2009). These results


                                                   3
show that latencies of sound processing and discrimination can depend critically on the level of
semantic categorization. Given that the participants were not explicitly asked to identify sound
subcategories in these studies, the specific functional role of each of these differential stages and
their link to perception remains unresolved.


Here, we apply a multivariate analysis to AEPs in response to sounds of living and man-made objects
while participants were explicitly instructed to categorize (and identify) the sound. The ability to
categorize sounds was challenged by manipulating the sound duration. In a preliminary
psychophysics experiment we evaluated the duration for which the number of recognized and
unrecognized sounds was roughly counterbalanced. This sound duration was then used for the main
experiment. In the analysis, we separately considered those trials corresponding to sounds that
subjects could correctly categorize and those for which subjects were not able to provide an answer.
Our main goal was to evaluate whether differential activity to the living and man-made semantic
categories manifests irrespective of behavioral outcome and to uncover the electrophysiological
response linked to subjects’ ability to perceive the sound’s category. We hypothesized that living and
man-made categorization is still detectable in the EEG response even when subjects do not
categorize the sounds and that a second (later) modulation was present only for correctly
categorized sounds. This hypothesis stems from the abovementioned works on perceptual decision-
making showing the existence of at least two stages in stimulus processing; the first one related to a
coarse level stimulus representation, the second (later in time) to integration of available sensory
information. We based our analyses on a multivariate decoding approach revealing at which latency
it is possible to accurately decode the semantic category of the sounds in presence or not of correct
categorization. Importantly, our method is based on modulation in voltage topographies (De Lucia et
al., 2007; Murray et al., 2009; De Lucia et al. 2010b; Tzovara et al., 2011; Bernasconi et al., 2011)
which takes advantage of the overall voltage configuration at the scalp without a priori selection of
specific electrodes’ location.




2. Materials and Methods


In the following we first present a pilot study whose aim was to select the sound duration at which
the number of sounds identified was roughly equal to that unidentified. We then present the main
experiment of this study that used the same sounds from the pilot study (and the duration estimated
based on the pilot study results) in combination with the recording of EEG.



                                                  4
2.1 Pilot study


Subjects:


Fifteen healthy subjects (all men and 20-26 years old) participated in a psychophysical test. All
subjects were right-handed and provided written, informed consent to participate in the study, the
procedures of which were approved by the Ethics Committee of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Vaudois and University of Lausanne. No subject had a history of neurological or psychiatric illness,
and all reported normal hearing and vision (or corrected to normal).


Stimuli:


Auditory stimuli were complex, meaningful sounds (16 bit mono; 44100 Hz digitalization) of living
and man-made objects, including 108 sounds (53 sounds of living objects) (Supplemental Material 1).
Sounds of living items included human non-verbal vocalizations and animal vocalizations (15 and 38,
respectively). Within the man-made category there were 12 sounds of musical instruments. We
prepared three sound sets each including 108 stimuli, which differed in the sound duration: 100ms,
250ms, 500ms.


Each subject was tested using one fixed duration of the sounds to avoid any priming effects. Initially,
we planned to test 5 subjects for each duration. However, as detailed below, it was immediately
evident from the first 3 subjects that the 100ms duration was too short for accurate performance.
Consequently, 3 subjects were tested with 100ms duration sounds, 7 subjects were tested with
250ms duration sounds, and 5 subjects were tested with 500ms duration sounds. Sounds were
presented via insert earphones (model ER-4P; Etymotic Research) at an individually adjusted volume,
and subjects were asked to categorize the sound as living or as man-made.


Results:
With the 100ms duration the first three subjects were unable to categorize or identify the majority of
the presented sounds. We decided therefore to exclude the 100ms sound duration from further
testing. With the 500ms duration sound bank, the five subjects categorized the overwhelming
majority of the sounds. Finally, we observed that the best sound length was 250ms. In this case we
tested seven subjects (five subjects initially planned plus those that we did not test with 100ms
sound duration). With 250ms sound duration, five of the seven subjects could correctly categorize 75
sounds (within which 38 were also correctly identified) and could not categorize 33 sounds. We



                                                   5
concluded that 250ms duration was optimal within the three tested durations for obtaining a
balanced number of identified and unidentified sounds.


2.2 EEG Experiment


Subjects


Nine healthy subjects (4 women), aged 20-30 years participated in the EEG study. All subjects
provided written, informed consent to participate in the study, the procedures of which were
approved by the Ethics Committee of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of
Lausanne. All subjects were right-handed (Oldfield, 1971). No subject had a history of neurological or
psychiatric illness, and all reported normal hearing and vision (or corrected to normal).


Procedure and task


Subjects listened to each sound and after a 700 ms intervening period, they were first asked to
indicate via a 3-alternative-forced-choice button press its category (living, man-made, or unknown)
and second indicated via a 2-alternative-forced-choice button press if they were able to identify the
object (yes vs. no). After one second, an image was presented on the screen for 1000ms. This image
represented or not the same object as the initially presented sound. After 800ms subjects listened to
the same sound and were asked to answer to the same questions as after the first presentation.
Subjects were asked to answer each question with the maximum of confidence (the speed of the
answer was not emphasized, but we limited the time to answer to 5 seconds). During the EEG
recording, the stimuli were divided into 14 blocks, each block was about 6 minutes long and included
50 sequences of sound, image and sound presentation. Sounds were randomly selected from the
complete list of sounds and therefore some sounds were sometimes repeated within each block and
across blocks. Between each block a break was proposed. In the following, we consider only the first
part of the experiment; that is to say the initial sound presentation and the behavioral outcome of
the categorization task only.



EEG acquisition and preprocessing


Continuous 160-channel EEG was acquired through a Biosemi system (1024 Hz sampling rate, offline
band-pass filtered 0.1–40 Hz). Peri-stimulus epochs of continuous EEG (-100 to 400 ms) were
extracted for each subject and for each living/man-made condition. Trials with blinks or eye
movements were rejected off-line. An automated artifact rejection criterion of ±100µV was applied

                                                   6
at all electrodes, and EEG epochs were also visually evaluated. Data from artifact electrodes from
each subject and condition were interpolated using three-dimensional splines (Perrin et al., 1987). All
data were then recalculated against the average reference. On the basis of the behavioral outcome
for each subject, we separately considered three possible subgroups of trials: those in response to
sounds that subjects correctly categorized as living or man-made, trials for which subjects could not
guess (i.e. answered ‘unknown’) and those in response to sounds for which subjects gave a wrong
answer (i.e. categorize as living a man-made sound or vice versa). Because this trial selection was
performed for each subject and depending on his/her specific behavioral output, epochs in response
to different sounds where included in the same subcategories across subjects. Artifact-free trials in
response to man-made sounds that subjects misjudged as living were relatively fewer than those in
response to sounds of living items that subjects categorized as man-made. We therefore decided to
ignore this subgroup of trials in the following analysis. In summary, we considered only two
subgroups of responses: those in response to sounds whose category was correctly categorized and
those for which subjects could not say whether the sound was living or man-made (hereafter termed
uncategorized).


Datasets definition
For both the uncategorized and correctly categorized stimuli, we first considered two sets of single
trials, one in response to sounds of living items and one in response to man-made sounds. We used
part of these trials for training and testing the classifier as explained in section 3. In addition, for
both the uncategorized and correctly categorized sounds, we considered an independent dataset
(validation dataset) that we used to have a final evaluation of the classification performance (see
next two sections for details on the number of trials for training/testing and validation). Keeping
separate the datasets used for optimizing the classifier’s parameters and the one used for estimating
the classification performance is essential for assessing how well the classifier generalizes to
previously unseen data (Kriegeskorte et al., 2009). For both categorized and uncategorized cases, we
randomly selected the trials included in the training/testing dataset and the validation dataset within
the whole set of artifact-free single trials available. This random selection is fixed once before all the
analyses.
As will be clear in the following, we ran the analysis at the group level, finding a common spatio-
temporal pattern across all subjects (for similar approaches see Shinkareva et al 2011). This analysis
is performed separately for uncategorized and categorized sounds.


Datasets in response to uncategorized sounds


                                                    7
Only five of the subjects (one woman) had at least 10 artifact-free trials in response to uncategorized
sounds for each of the two semantic categories (living and man-made). All the analyses described in
the following refer therefore to these 5 subjects only. The whole list of uncategorized sounds is
shown in the Supplemental Material2 (see also behavioral results for the EEG experiment). The
dataset in response to sounds that subjects could not guess and that we used for training and testing
the classifier included 50 trials from the living category and 50 trials from the man-made category
overall. Collapsing data across subjects was necessary to include a sufficient number of trials for the
classification analysis. The remaining single-trials were used to validate the classification
performance. Specifically we consider as validation dataset a total of 77 single-trials in response to
sounds of living items (that were not categorized). These data were extracted from all the 5 subjects
ranging from 1 to 29 trials from each of them. By contrast the single trials in response to man-made
sounds that we could use for the validation were too few (14 in total across the 5 subjects). We
therefore decided to validate the classifier performance on responses to sounds of living items.


Datasets in response to correctly categorized sounds
For the same cohort of five subjects, we considered a total of 40 single trials for each subject and
each semantic category for training and testing the classifier. This number of single trials was chosen
so as to limit the computational time required for training and testing the classification performance
at the group level (that is to say when collapsing single-trial data across subjects and therefore
including 200 single-trials per condition).
In addition, we considered a validation dataset that included a total of 40 trials across subjects for
each category, living and man-made.


Sound acoustic analysis
We analyzed the sets of living and man-made sounds whose single-trial EEG responses were included
in the datasets as described above. The goal was to assess whether the sets of living and man-made
sounds (the uncategorized and correctly categorized were analyzed separately) differed acoustically.
For both uncategorized and correctly categorized sounds, we first considered living and man-made
sounds for each subject separately including only those sounds that were used in the training and
testing phase. In addition, for the correctly categorized sounds, we considered the set of sounds
collapsed across subjects whose single-trial EEG responses were included in the validation datasets.
This analysis was not possible in the case of the uncategorized sounds because the validation
datasets included only EEG responses to living sounds.
The acoustic analysis between living and man-made sounds consisted in statistically comparing the
spectrograms (defined with Matlab’s spectrogram function with no overlapping and zero padding),

                                                  8
using a time–frequency bin width of 5ms and 74 Hz. Statistical contrasts entailed a series of
nonparametric t tests based on a bootstrapping procedure with 5000 iterations per time–frequency
bin to derive an empirical distribution against which to compare the actual difference between the
mean spectrograms from each sound category (Knebel et al., 2008; De Lucia et al., 2009, 2010a). A
significant difference at a given time–frequency bin was only considered reliable if all eight of its
immediately adjacent bins also yielded values of p < 0.05 (i.e., a 3x3 bin spatial threshold was
applied). This constitutes a minimal level of correction for multiple contrasts and time–frequency
autocorrelation, as we were particularly interested in this analysis being overly sensitive to acoustic
differences.
As a result of these analyses, we found minor statistically reliable differences at the single subject
level for uncategorized sounds (Figure 1, black-framed panels). It is worth noting that each of the ten
test datasets included single trials belonging to one single subject only. Therefore in the
training/testing phase, the classifier discriminated between trials in response to living and man-made
sounds that exhibited minor acoustical differences.
By contrast we found statistical differences at the single subject level in the case of correctly
categorized sounds (not shown). Finally there were only minor statistically reliable differences
between the sets of correctly categorized living and man-made sounds of the validation dataset
(Figure1, blue-framed panel).


3.   Classification procedure


The aim of the study was decoding the semantic category of each sound presented to the subjects
both when the sound was correctly categorized and when subjects could not indicate the sound’s
category. Decoding was here based on a classification algorithm that identified at a single-trial level
the sound’s semantic category. The classification analysis was run separately for correctly
categorized and uncategorized sounds.
For each subject and semantic category, we partitioned the training/testing dataset into ten splits.
Training was performed based on nine splits; the remaining (independent) split was used to test the
classifier. Training and testing were repeated ten times using different splits and in a way that testing
was always run on an independent partition of the data. Classification performance was assessed
based on average classification accuracy (ratio of correctly classified single-trials) across the ten test
datasets and on the validation dataset. However, only the classification performance obtained on the
validation dataset is a reliable estimation the classification accuracy. Indeed, this set of trials had not
been used at any point for training and for selecting the parameters of the classifier.


                                                    9
3.1 Method for single-trial classification


Preprocessing


For each experimental condition (living and man-made), we considered the concatenation of peri-
stimulus EEG epochs (trials). At each time point, we represent the data across the electrode montage
as a vector of voltage measurements m={m1,m2,…,mN}, where N is the total number of electrodes
(Figure 2a). We refer to this vector as topography. These trials were pre-processed by normalizing
each topography m by its total EEG power time point by time point. The aim of this normalization is
to minimize the difference between voltage topographies due to the strength of the field evoked on
the scalp (and to emphasize instead differences due to the overall shape of the topography) (Michel
et al., 2001; Michel et al., 2004). In the following, we refer to m as a generic normalized topography
at one time point. T indicates the total number of trials in the training dataset for each condition.


3.1.1 Training phase
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) estimation


The first step of our analysis consisted of modeling the statistical distribution of the ensemble of
topographies in the training dataset (see Tzovara et al. 2011 for more details). At this stage of the
analysis, each experimental condition (living/man-made) was processed separately and all the
available topographies were pooled together disregarding the latencies at which they were observed
and the trial to which they belonged (Figure 2a, right panel).
We considered a GMM probability distribution in an N-dimensional space (Figure 2a right panel)




                                                 (1)


where Pk is the kth Gaussian distribution with mean μk and covariance σk, pk is the prior probability of
the class label k and Q is the total number of Gaussians. In the following, we refer to the means -     -




                                                   10
of the Gaussians as template maps, and for simplicity we replace the notation              with     ” to

indicate the k-th Gaussian within the GMM.
The GMM estimation was based on an expectation-maximization procedure (Dempster et al, 1977;
Bishop, 1995) that iterates the estimation of the model’s parameters (priors, means and covariance
matrices) in order to minimize the error function, or equivalently maximize the likelihood :




                                (2)




where the index j spans the total number of topographies in the training dataset, i.e. the total
number of topographies in one trial multiplied by the total number of trials in the training dataset for
one condition. The initialization of the expectation-maximization procedure was based on a k-means
clustering algorithm (Bishop, 1995) that provides a first guess of the means and the covariance
matrices. The values for the priors,     , were obtained by the relative number of topographies for

each cluster. Due to the limited number of training samples, we reduced the number of free
parameters by constraining the covariance matrix to be diagonal.
Model estimation based on expectation-maximization requires knowing in advance the total number
of Gaussians, Q, in the model (in the example of Figure 2a right panel, Q=3). In the following, we
explored many possible values of Q for each condition, and we then selected the optimal values
based on maximizing classification accuracy (see Optimizing the total number of Gaussians).


Evaluating the posterior probabilities of single-trial ERP data


Once the GMM models had been estimated, we could assign each topography of the original dataset
to one of the Gaussians     in the model. This could be done by computing the posterior probabilities

(Bishop, 1995: p. 23-27) defined as in the following:




(3)



                                                   11
where           is the unconditional density function, i.e. the density function for m irrespective of the

Gaussian    .

In order to investigate stimulus-related information, we rearranged the posterior probabilities to
their original temporal order in the data, providing a new representation of the single-trial ERPs in
time and across trials (see Figure 1 in Tzovara et al. 2011). For each trial, this rearrangement
generated a time series of the posterior probability for each template map in the mixture.
The posterior probabilities across trials typically revealed a pattern of presence of a given template
map that was structured in time (Figure 2b, Figure 2a-b), where         is the topography of t-th trial, at

time-latency h. This posterior probability was computed at each latency and for each Gaussian            in

the GMM model for each experimental condition. At this point we could compare the two conditions
by taking advantage of the model estimated on each of the two conditions, separately.


Identifying discriminative time periods between conditions


In the following           and          indicate the topographies of Condition 1 and Condition 2,

respectively, appearing at the trial t and latency h;      and    refer to two generic Gaussians in the

GMMs for the two conditions. Based on the two models and datasets, we computed
                and              as shown in Equation3.

At each time-point h, we considered only one Gaussian per model, i.e. the one that yielded the
highest posterior probability across trials within all the Q Gaussians in the model:




(4)




(5)



                                                    12
Within all the Gaussians in the two models, we expected that only a subset of them would be
informative about the difference between the two conditions and possibly only along a certain time
period (discriminative time period).
For identifying discriminative periods between single-trials in response to living and man-made
sounds, we compared time-point by time-point whether the posterior probabilities                  and

            were different between conditions by means of non‐parametric statistical analyses (e.g.

Kruskal-Wallis test) in the training dataset (see Tzovara et al. 2011 for a similar approach based on
Bayes Factor). This strategy could reveal one or more continuous time periods of differential activity
between conditions. We call H the set of time-points over which the two conditions differed (Figure
2b). This approach estimated discriminative time-periods in a data driven manner without a priori
selection of the duration of these periods.


3.1.2 Testing phase


Discrimination function and accuracy


During the test phase, we computed the posterior probabilities                   and            on the

single trials belonging to the test dataset and along the temporal period H that had been estimated
in the training phase (Figure2c). The discrimination function for the trial t was defined as:




(9)


The idea was to assign a trial from the test dataset to Condition1 if the posterior probability of the
most likely Gaussian for the first model (Equation 4) was higher than the posterior probability of the
most likely Gaussian for the second model (Equation 5), and vice versa.
The classification performance was evaluated by the absolute classification accuracy (percentage of
correctly classified single trials as living or man-made). We therefore obtained a set of values of
classification accuracy evaluated on ten independent test datasets.


Optimizing the total number of Gaussians and classification performance
In order to find the optimum values for the total number of Gaussians, Q, we generated a set of
models for each condition separately, with each of these two parameters ranging from three to nine.

                                                   13
Because we had considered ten splits of the data, for each pair of models we obtained ten values of
classification accuracy. The best number of Gaussians was determined so as to maximize the mean
classification accuracy across the ten datasets.
We report the mean classification accuracy obtained on the test datasets and on the validation
dataset separately. The classification accuracy obtained on the validation dataset was compared to
the chance classification performance obtained by randomly shuffling the labels 100 times in the
training and tests datasets. For each shuffle of the labels, we re-trained the classifier for the
previously selected parameters (i.e. number of maps for each of the two models) and we evaluated
its performance on the validation dataset. We carried out a paired statistical comparison (Wilcoxon
signed-rank test; p < 0.001) between classification performance of the true classifier and the 100
mean classification results obtained by randomly reshuffling the labels (see Pereira et al., 2009 for
general guidelines on comparison between classifiers’ performance and chance-level). In practice this
test entails computing the difference between the values that the true classifier assigns to each
validation trial (1 if correct, 0 otherwise), and those assigned by the ‘random classifier’. The mean of
these differences across trials in the validation dataset is tested with a Wilcoxon test to reject the
null hypothesis that these 100 mean differences have median zero.




Testing the role of specific temporal period


The ten-fold training and testing analyses described above could reveal one or more temporal
periods over which the two conditions significantly differ. In order to establish their contribution to
the above-chance classification performance we ran a further analysis in the case when more than
one continuous period of time points was found by the classification algorithm. For each of the
latencies that we found significant in the previous analysis, we tested whether it was possible to
decode semantic categories using the posterior probability computed along these periods of time
only. As it will be clear in the following, decoding of semantic categories of correctly categorized
sounds involved two separated time-periods. We therefore tested whether each of them could be
informative enough for obtaining above-chance classification accuracy in the validation dataset.




4. Results


4.2 Behavioral results


                                                   14
Accuracy and response time
Subjects accurately categorized most of the sounds. The average percentage (±SEM is indicated for
all the average percentages) of correctly categorized man-made sounds was 88±1%; 5±1% were
misjudged as living and 7±1% of the total number of the presented sounds was uncategorized. The
average percentage of correctly categorized sounds of living items was 72±3%, whereas
miscategorized sounds were 15±2% and uncategorized was 13±2%.
Response times to uncategorized sounds were significantly longer than response times of correctly
categorized ones (t-test; p<0.05) (Table 1).


Distribution of correctly categorized and uncategorized sounds throughout the experiment


We analyzed the possible influence of fatigue and/or a priming effect on behavior. We first tested
whether miscategorization of sounds was due to a fatigue effect by controlling the presentation
order of sounds that were correctly categorized with respect to uncategorized ones. Presentation
order (indicated as PO in Tables 2 and 3) was analyzed by assigning an index (from 1 to the total
number of presented sounds) to each sound along the experiment. We tested statistically whether
this index of all the correctly categorized sounds included in the analysis was different from that of
the uncategorized sounds. This test was performed for each category and each subject separately
(this separation is justified by the same data partition in the single-trial analysis). We found that
there was no statistical difference for most of the subjects and the semantic category (Table 2); two
significant differences were found (first subject man-made category and third subject living category)
always with the uncategorized sounds occurring on average earlier than the correctly categorized
one. Therefore, we concluded that we did not have any evidence of a fatigue effect.
For all the subjects, we found a subset of sounds that were sometimes correctly categorized and
sometimes uncategorized (indicated as overlapping sounds in Table 3, first and fourth columns). We
investigated whether this behavioral result was interpretable in terms of a priming effect. Specifically
we checked if uncategorized sounds were not priming those sounds that were, later in time, correctly
categorized. Because each sound was presented many times during the course of the experiment, we
computed the mean index (i.e. mean presentation order) for each of the sounds when they were
correctly categorized and when they were not. We therefore obtained a set of mean presentation
order for each of the sounds when they were correctly categorized and when they were not (Table 3,
second and third columns for living category, fifth and sixth columns for man-made category),
considering here only those sounds to which subjects did not answer consistently. We finally tested
statistically whether these mean values differed (paired t-test; p<0.05). We found that this difference


                                                  15
was always significant, and we therefore concluded that it was not possible to exclude the presence
of a priming effect.




4.2 Classification results
Uncategorized sounds


By training and testing across ten splits of the data, we evaluated the discriminative time interval
between single trials in response to living and man-made sounds (that were all uncategorized) and
the corresponding classification performance computed as the mean ratio of correctly classified
single-trials (±SEM is indicated for all the average accuracies). The discriminative time interval
between living and man-made single trials was found between 116 and 174ms post-stimulus onset
(thick line in Figure 3ab) as observed in at least 8 out of ten training dataset (Figure4). This
differential activity was observed in all the ten training datasets (Figure 4), therefore demonstrating a
persistent and robust effect across subjects.
The average accuracy across the ten test datasets was 0.62 (±0.05). On a validation dataset (one class
of single-trials in response to sounds of living items) the classification accuracy was 0.68. This
accuracy was significantly above chance-level (Wilcoxon signed-rank test; p < 0.001).
Figure 3 shows the average posterior probability for the living and man-made datasets and the
corresponding template maps (Figure3a,b). We show here only those posterior probabilities that
were on average higher than all the others at least at one time point during the discriminative time
period. The average posterior probabilities are highly structured in both cases during the post-
stimulus period and in comparison to the baseline, with some template maps that remain ‘active’
(i.e. higher on average than the others) for up to 50ms. This is the case of the blue-framed template
maps around 100ms, the red-framed template maps starting at around 200ms and the cyan-framed
one at the end of the trials in both conditions.
The discriminative time interval was between 116 and 174ms post-stimulus onset (thick line in Figure
3ab and Figure4) involved mostly four template maps for the living condition and the red-framed
map for the man-made condition (Figure 3 ab). A visual inspection of the voltage distributions in each
of these template maps and the corresponding average posterior probabilities should clarify the role
of this time-interval in discriminating between the two categories: the red-framed map of the man-
made model shows a frontal positive polarity; in the same interval and for the living model the most
represented template maps are characterized by different spatial distributions with the exception of
the red-framed one (similar to the red-framed map of the man-made model). Because of the
difference in the spatial distributions of most of these maps across models, the difference of the

                                                   16
posterior probabilities obtained based by these two models leads to a robust classification between
living and man-made sounds. From the same figure and following the same reasoning, we can
observe that other periods are less informative for discriminating living and man-made objects. For
example we can observe that starting at around 200ms post-stimulus onset, both datasets are on
average best represented by the red-framed map of both models. This time-period is not
discriminative because the red-framed maps have a similar spatial distribution on the scalp.
At the test level (Figure 3c,d), the posterior probability of living and man-made single-trials,
respectively, offer an intuitive representation of the classification result: a       living sound is
represented -during the discriminative period (thick line)- by both the green-framed and cyan
template maps as it is evident when fitting the single-trial related to this sound to the living model
(Figure 3c); vice versa the same response when fitted to the man-made model is not providing the
same amount of evidence that the red template map of the man-made model was actually active
(Figure 3d). An analogous observation can be derived for a man-made sound, that basically does not
activate any of the template maps shown in panel a (Figure 3e), while it shows a similar pattern of
red-framed template maps as in panel b when fitted to the man-made model (Figure 3f).




Correctly categorized sounds


As we did for the uncategorized sounds dataset, we considered all the single trials collapsed across
subjects for each of the category living and man-made (±SEM is indicated for all the average
accuracies). We obtained two intervals of significant difference between 112 and 185ms post-
stimulus onset, and between 270 and 342ms (Figure 5, time intervals evaluated in at least 8 out of
the training datasets). Mean accuracy across the ten test datasets was 0.55 (±0.02). When classifying
based on the two time periods separately, mean accuracy -across ten datasets was 0.54 (±0.03) and
0.58 (±0.03), respectively. On the validation dataset we obtained 0.56 when taking advantage of both
intervals, and 0.52 and 0.63 when considering separately the first and the second interval,
respectively. All these three classification accuracies obtained on the validation dataset were
significantly above chance level. (Wilcoxon signed-rank test; p < 0.001).




5. Discussion


We decoded semantic categories at a single-trial level by identifying modulations of the voltage
topographies, previously normalized by the strength of their activity (De Lucia et al., 2007; Murray et

                                                  17
al., 2009; De Lucia et al. 2010b; Tzovara et al., 2011; Bernasconi et al., 2011). Through multivariate
decoding, we could establish whether specific differential activity in the EEG response to living and
man-made sounds can be exploited to accurately decode a sound’s semantic category. We carried
out this analysis when subjects explicitly and correctly categorized sounds as living or as man-made,
as well as when they could not provide an answer. We obtained two main findings. First, we showed
the brain can discriminate semantic categories (living and man-made) at early stages (116ms to
174ms post-stimulus onset) of sound processing even when it does not transpire behaviorally.
Second, perceptual decision-making of environmental sounds typically relies on two stages of
differential processing; during the first of these periods -overlapping with that observed for
uncategorized sounds- enough evidence was accumulated for decoding sound categories from the
EEG signal with an above-chance accuracy; the second stage of differential processing occurred after
the sound ended. The first of these sets of results shows that even when subjects could not
categorize the sounds, an above-chance decoding accuracy was obtained at early stages of sound
processing. We interpret this evidence as the effect of a coarse level representation of the semantic
category that is probably not sufficiently accurate for allowing a confident behavioral response
during the categorization task. This result is particularly interesting in view of the fact that this early
differential activity cannot readily be explained in terms of low-level acoustic differences between
the groups of living and man-made sounds. Indeed comparisons between the spectrograms of the
living and man-made sounds at the single subject level highlighted only sparse and minor time-
frequency bins exhibiting statistically significant differences (Figure 1). Moreover, because
uncategorized sounds were different across subjects, possibly undetected low-level differences
between living and man-made sounds (see Supplemental Material 2) would unlikely occur at the
same latency for all the subjects. We conclude that decoding at this stage of sound processing is
based on its semantic content (at least at a gross categorical level).


Aside from there being a certain degree of semantic representation that underlies the above-chance
decoding accuracy of uncategorized sounds, it is worth noting that this result is based on time-locked
differential activity between living and man-made sounds. One would expect that the dynamic
nature of the presented stimuli would produce a certain jitter in the timing when accumulated
sensory evidence reached a certain level for decoding the semantic content of the sound. If this were
the case, our results indicate that for our sets of sounds the limit for the evidence accumulation time
interval can jitter between 116 and 174ms post-stimulus onset.


In the case of correctly categorized sounds, we observed two discriminative intervals. The first can be
interpreted as playing the role of a first level of semantic categorization in a similar way as observed


                                                    18
for uncategorized sounds. Indeed, the latencies of this first differential activity for categorized and
uncategorized sounds were highly overlapping (cf. Figure 4 and Figure 5), despite the fact that these
two analyses were run independently. When considering the first period of differential activity (112-
185ms post-stimulus onset) between living and man-made sounds, we obtained a relatively lower
classification accuracy for correctly categorized sounds in comparison to uncategorized sounds. This
effect can be explained by a higher degree of heterogeneity of the first of these two groups. Indeed,
correctly categorized sounds included both sounds whose related object could be later identified and
those for which subjects could only categorize the sound as man-made or as that of a living item. By
contrast, the uncategorized sounds were forcibly also unidentified.




The analysis of single trials in response to correctly categorized sounds revealed in addition a
discriminative time-period after the sound ended (270-342ms post-stimulus onset). Because this
second component is present only when subjects explicitly categorized the sound as living or man-
made, it is likely representing the stage connecting the perceptual level to the process of executing a
behavioral response, that is to say directly associated to the decision-making process. The relatively
early latencies of this differential activity suggest that the present effects were not an artifact of
motor planning and preparation, further supporting its role as a perceptual decision-making
component. As for the uncategorized sounds, the comparison between the spectrograms of living
and man-made sounds lead to minor statistically significant differences. These results support the
conclusion that the above-chance classification accuracy in decoding single trials in response to living
and man-made sounds cannot be explained in terms of acoustic differences but rather in relation to
their semantic content.


It remains an open question whether it is possible to predict if a specific sound will be correctly
categorized. In other words, it is presently unclear which features make a sound ultimately be
correctly categorized. Ability to recognize a sound is certainly a function of the accumulated evidence
over time, i.e. their duration in time (Bigand et al.; 2011; see also Bestelmeyer et al., 2011). This is
because all the presented sounds were easily recognized when presented for a longer duration (i.e.
500ms). However the analysis of subjects’ behavior during the EEG experiment has shown that
subjects were also influenced by the number of times the same sound was repeated during the
experiment, at least for part of the presented sounds (cf. Table3 and Supplemental Material2).
Further investigations and experiments are required to disentangle effects of low-level features of
the presented sounds and possible priming effects in relation to their impact on subjects’ behavior


                                                  19
(see Murray et al 2008 and De Lucia et al. 2010c for priming effects induced by environmental sounds
repetition).


Behavioral analyses have also shown that we could exclude that the difference between correctly
categorized and uncategorized sounds was due to an effect of fatigue. Indeed, we did not find
evidence of a systematic deterioration of subjects’ ability during the course of the experiment as
would be expected if fatigue was influencing behavior.


Comparison to existing literature


Perceptual decision-making both in the visual and somatosensory domains has emphasized the
existence of at least two stages in stimulus processing leading to stimulus discrimination; mainly a
bottom up process followed by higher-level involvement of areas responsible for             perceptual
decision- making (Salinas et al., 2000; Romo et al., 2003; Philiastides et al., 2006a). Our results
confirm the existence of at least two stages leading to perceptual decision across sensory modalities.
In addition we show for the first time that discrimination at early stages of sound processing is not
related to low-level features of auditory stimuli. Rather, semantic categorization can be decoded at
these latencies and in the absence of behavioral proficiency.


Most of the studies focusing on perceptual decision-making are based on sets of stimuli that differ
with respect to their low-level feature content. Consequently, it was not possible to evaluate
whether early and time-locked differential activity was related to the specific physical characteristic
of the presented stimuli or more generally to its related semantic category. This is the case of studies
looking at perceptual decision-making in the visual domain. Philiastides et al. (Philiastides et al.,
2006a; Philiastides et al., 2006b) found that the N170 component could be used to discriminate face
versus car stimuli, irrespective of the task difficulty induced by the noise level in the stimuli. Other
common experimental paradigms in the visual domain, such as those involving the discrimination of
motion direction also includes differences at the level of physical features of the presented stimuli
(i.e. Kim and Shadlen, 1999; Bennur and Gold, 2011). Clearly, in both cases the advantage is that it is
possible to control a priori the noise level, and looking at the dependency of neural activity on the
degree of task difficulty. By contrast, in our study we could not determine which sounds were more
difficult to categorize. Our distinction between categorized and uncategorized sounds is based on
behavior and therefore evaluated a posteriori. Despite these differences, the latencies of our effects
are similar to those found in the visual domain with complex stimuli (Philiastides et al., 2006a); the
first processing component occurring around 170ms post-stimulus, the second component starting at
300ms and shifting up to 450ms post-stimulus onset depending on task difficulty.

                                                  20
Our results are not readily comparable with the limited extant literature on perceptual decision-
making in the auditory domain. In previous studies subjects were asked to attribute the presented
stimuli to one of two possible alternative phoneme ‘categories’, independent of the level of noise
mask (Binder et al. 2004; Kaiser et al. 2006). The two alternative options were well separated in
terms of their frequency content and therefore likely to be directly related to the quality of sensory
information. In the current study, we consider environmental sounds that were grouped on the basis
of behavioral outcome (correctly categorized or uncategorized) with different uncategorized sounds
for each subject and each living/man-made category. Another important difference with respect to
previous works is in the nature of the experimental task. In previous studies participants had to
choose between two possible alternatives after a pair of sounds had been presented in sequence,
therefore implicitly asking the subject to memorize the sequence before giving an answer. In the
current study the categorization is based on subjects’ past experience not on the direct memory of
recent stimuli.




Multivariate decoding


Our multivariate decoding approach is based on the modulation of the presence of voltage
topographies that were previously normalized. This approach is therefore not biased by an a priori
selection of the electrodes where one would expect to observe an effect and is informative about
variations in the spatial configurations of the underlying neural sources. Indeed our multivariate
approach is based on differences in the relative presence of specific voltage configurations that
reflect specific spatial arrangements of neural generators. Other approaches based on the voltage
measurement at multiple electrode sites do not consider the voltage topographies as
multidimensional measurement, and therefore the information about the voltage distribution and its
neurophysiologic interpretability is not taken into account(i.e. Philiastides et al., 2006). With respect
to the values of the classification accuracy obtained, these are in line with what has been shown with
environmental sounds and multivariate decoding in fMRI (Staeren et al. 2009). Using
electrophysiologic signals, decoding sound categories at the single-trial AEP level has turned out to
be more challenging than in the visual domain. Simanova et al (Simanova et al, 2010) attempted at
decoding semantic categories of auditory stimuli at the single-trial level in an experiment in which
subjects were asked to perform a task irrelevant to the categorization. A multivariate pattern analysis
based on Bayesian logistic regression performed poorly in comparison to a similar analysis applied to
visual stimuli; and in about half of the subjects they obtained chance-level classification accuracy.
Despite that, in a more challenging experimental paradigm, Bernasconi et al. (2011) could show that

                                                   21
the same single-trial analysis as applied in the present study lead to an above-chance prediction of
subjects auditory percepts while listening to acoustically identical auditory stimuli that were
erroneously perceived as differing in pitch or duration.


Conclusions


We have shown that the brain is able to discriminate the semantic category of environmental sounds
even when this does not transpire behaviorally. Two stages of differential activity over the initial
400ms post-stimulus onset contribute to perceptual decision-making. An early stage of sound
processing (at ~116ms) is observed irrespective of whether or not subjects could explicitly categorize
the sound as belonging to the man-made or to the living semantic category. Correct categorization
requires a subsequent processing stage (at ~270ms). To the best of our knowledge we provide for
the first time an insight into brain mechanisms of auditory perceptual decision-making of complex
environmental     stimuli.   Moreover,     using     normalized   voltage   topographies   we   could
neurophysiologically interpret our classification results in terms of changes in the underlying neural
generators activated in response to sounds belonging to different semantic categories.




Figure 1. Statistical comparison between spectrograms of living and man-made sounds. For each

panel we show on the left the p values of the results of this comparison at each time-frequency bin

(~5ms and ~80Hz); on the right we show in red the bins meeting the following statistical: eight

spatially contiguous bins exhibit statistically significant results (non-parametric t-test; p<0.05

equivalent to a cluster-level value of p<0.00625).

(Black-framed panels) Results of the analyses conducted on the sounds included in the training and

testing datasets of uncategorized sounds for each subjects separately (numbered from 1 to 5).

(Blue-framed panel) Results of the comparison between the spectrograms of living and man-made

sounds that were correctly categorized and whose single-trial EEG responses were included in the

validation dataset.

Figure 2. Schematic representation of the single-trial classification.




                                                     22
a. (left panel) At each time-point, the topography is represented as a vector in N-dimensional space

(where N=#electrodes). (right panel) At this stage we do not take into account the latency and the

trial to which it belongs and all the voltage topographies are pooled together in an N-dimensional

space. Only the semantic category information is kept in this representation. Each dataset is

modelled as a GMM; in the figure we show two GMMs with three Gaussians in the mixture.

b. Based on GMM models’ parameters, each topography is assigned a set of posterior probabilities,

the number of which equals that of the Gaussians in the mixture. The set of posterior probabilities

values are re-arranged time-point by time-point and re-assigned to each of the original trials. Left

and right panels show the average posterior probabilities across trials for each of the two models and

datasets, together with the discriminative time-period H where the two conditions are most

different.

c. Example of posterior probabilities of a test single-trial. Only those posterior probabilities that

appeared during the discriminative time-period are relevant for the classification. This single-trial is

classified as belonging to the X condition because the green posterior probability estimated from the

X model (left panel) is higher than estimated from the Y model (right panel), during the relevant

time-period.



Figure 3. Panels a and b. Summary of the template maps and average posterior probabilities

obtained when training the GMM model separately on the living and man-made datasets (panels a

and b, respectively). During the discriminative time-period 116-174ms, (see section 4.2) average

posterior probabilities are plotted in thick lines, highlighting those values of probabilities that were

used to classify test data as living or as man-made. Color codes between panels a and b should be

read independently. (i.e. red-framed template map in a relates to red curve in the same panel only;

the same holds for panel b).

Panels c and d. Posterior probabilities of the single-trial response to the sound of a living object.

Panels c and d show the posterior probabilities obtained using the living and the man-made model,


                                                  23
respectively (color code in c and d refers to the template maps shown in a and b, respectively). The

sum of posterior probabilities along the discriminative period is higher in panel c than in panel d, that

is to say the living sound is correctly recognized by the classified.

Panels e and f. Posterior probabilities of the single-trial response to the sound of a man-made object.

Panels c and d show the posterior probabilities obtained using the living and the man-made model

respectively (color code in e and f refers to the template maps shown in a and b, respectively). The

sum of posterior probabilities along the discriminative period is higher in panel f than in panel e, that

is to say the man-made sound is correctly classified.



Figure4. Time-periods of differences between posterior probabilities assigned to trials of

uncategorized living and man-made sounds (trials in response to sounds for all subjects). Red

intervals highlight periods of differential activity between living and man-made trials as identified for

each training dataset. Differential activity between 116 and 174ms post-stimulus onset is consistently

observed despite subjects’ heterogeneity.



Figure5. Time-periods of differences between posterior probabilities assigned to trials of correctly

categorized living and man-made sounds (trials in response to sounds for all subjects). Red intervals

highlight periods of differential activity between living and man-made trials as identified for each

training dataset. Differential activity between 112 and 185ms post-stimulus onset, and between 270

and 342ms post-stimulus onset is consistently observed despite subjects’ heterogeneity.




Acknowledgements

        The Swiss National Science Foundation provided financial support (grants #K-33K1_122518/1

to MDL and 310030B_133136 to MMM).


                                                    24
References

Bennur, S., Gold, J.I., 2011. Distinct representations of a perceptual decision and the associated

        oculomotor plan in the monkey lateral intraparietal area. Journal of Neuroscience. 31(3),

        913-21.

Bernasconi, F., De Lucia, M., Tzovara, A., Manuel, A.L., Murray, M.M., Spierer, L. 2011. Noise in brain

        activity engenders perception and influences discrimination sensitivity. Journal of

        Neuroscience. 31(49):17971-17981.

Bestelmeyer, P.E., Belin, P., Grosbras, M.H. 2011. Right temporal TMS impairs voice detection.

        Current Biology 21, R838-9.

Bigand, E., Delbé, C., Gérard, Y., Tillmann, B. 2011. Categorization of extremely brief auditory stimuli:

        domain-specific or domain-general processes? PLoS One. 6, e27024.

Binder, J.R., Liebenthal, E., Possing, E.T., Medler, D.A., Ward, B.D., 2004. Neural correlates of

        sensory and decision processes in auditory object identification. Nature Neuroscience. 7,

        295–301.

Britten, K.H., Shadlen, M.N., Newsome, W.T., Movshon, J.A., 1992. The analysis of visual motion: a

        comparison of neuronal and psychophysical performance. Journal of Neuroscience. 12,

        4745–4765.

de Lafuente, V., Romo, R. 2005. Neuronal correlates of subjective sensory experience. Nature

    Neuroscience. 8, 1698–1703.

De Lucia, M., Michel, C.M., Clarke, S., Murray, M.M., 2007. Single-trial topographic analysis of human

    EEG: A new ‘image’ of event-related potentials. Proceedings Information Technology Applications

    in Biomedicine 2007.

De Lucia, M., Camen, C., Clarke, S., Murray, M.M., 2009. The role of actions in auditory object

    discrimination. Neuroimage. 48(2), 475-85.




                                                    25
De Lucia, M., Clarke, S., Murray, M.M., 2010a. A temporal hierarchy for conspecific vocalization

    discrimination in humans. Journal of Neuroscience. 30(33), 11210-21.

De Lucia, M., Michel, C.M., Murray, M.M., 2010b. Comparing ICA-based and single-trial topographic

    ERP analyses. Brain Topography. 23(2), 119-27.

De Lucia, M., Cocchi, L., Martuzzi, R., Meuli, R.A., Clarke, S., Murray, M.M., 2010c. Perceptual and

    Semantic Contributions to Repetition Priming of Environmental Sounds. Cerebral Cortex. 20 (7),

    1676-1684.

Dempster, A., Laird, N., Rubin, D., 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the

        EM algorithm (with discussion). Journal of Royal Statistical Society. B. 39, 1-38.

Heekeren, H.R., Marrett, S., Ungerleider, L.G., 2008. The neural systems that mediate human

        perceptual decision making. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 9(6), 467-79.

Hernandez, A., Zainos, A. & Romo, R., 2002. Temporal evolution of a decision-making process in

        medial premotor cortex. Neuron. 33, 959–972.

Gold, J. I., Shadlen, M. N., 2007. The neural basis of decision making. Annual Reviews of

        Neuroscience. 30, 535–574.

Kaiser, J., Lennert, T., Lutzenberger, W., 2006. Dynamics of oscillatory activity during auditory

        decision making. Cerebral Cortex. 17, 2258–2267.

Kilian-Hütten, N., Valente, G., Vroomen, J., Formisano, E., 2011. Auditory Cortex Encodes the

        perceptual Interpretation of Ambiguous Sound. Journal of Neuroscience. 31(5), 1715-1720

Kim, J. N., Shadlen, M. N., 1999. Neural correlates of a decision in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex

        of the macaque. Nature Neuroscience. 2, 176–185.

Knebel, J.F., Toepel, U., Hudry, J., le Coutre, J., Murray, M.M., 2008. Generating controlled image sets

    in cognitive neuroscience research. Brain Topography 20:284 –289.

Koenig, T. and Melie-García, L., 2010. A Method to Determine the Presence of Averaged Event-

    Related Fields Using Randomization Tests. Brain Topography. 23(3), 233-42.




                                                   26
Kriegeskorte N, Simmons WK, Bellgowan PS, Baker CI. 2009. Circular analysis in systems

    neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping. Nat Neurosci. 12(5):535-40. Review.

Lehmann, D., Skrandies, W., 1980. Reference-free identification of components of checkerboard-

    evoked multichannel potential fields. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. 48,

    609–621.

Murray, M.M., Camen, C., Gonzalez Andino, S.L., Bovet, P., Clarke, S., 2006. Rapid brain

    discrimination of sounds of objects. Journal of Neuroscience. 26(4), 1293-1302.

Murray, M.M., Brunet, D., Michel, C.M., 2008. Topographic ERP analyses : a step-by-step tutorial

    review. Brain Topography. 20, 249-264.

Murray, M.M., De Lucia, M., Brunet, D., Michel, C.M., 2009. Principles of Topographic Analyses of

    Electrical Neuroimaging. In: Event-Related Potentials II: Advances in ERP, EEG, & MEG Analysis

    MIT Press (Handy TC, Ed).

Murphy, B., Poesio, M., Bovolo, F., Bruzzone, L., Dalponte, M., Lakany, H., 2011. EEG decoding of

    semantic category reveals distributed representations for single concepts. Brain Lang. 117(1), 12-

    22.

Newsome, W. T., Britten, K. H., and Movshon, J. A., 1989. Neuronal correlates of a perceptual

    decision. Nature. 341, 52–54.

Oldfield, R.C., 1971. The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh Inventory.

    Neuropsychologia. 9, 97–113

Pereira, F., Mitchell, T., Botvinick M., 2009. Machine learning classifiers and fMRI: a tutorial overview.

    Neuroimage. 45(1 Suppl):S199-209.

Perrin, F., Pernier, J., Bertrand, O., Giard, M.H., Echallier, J.F., 1987. Mapping of scalp potentials by

      surface spline interpolation. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. 66, 75-81.

Philiastides, M.G., Sajda, P., 2006a. Temporal characterization of the neural correlates of perceptual

      decision making in the human brain. Cerebral Cortex. 16(4), 509-18.




                                                   27
Philiastides, M.G., Ratcliff, R., Sajda, P., 2006b. Neural representation of task difficulty and decision

      making during perceptual categorization: a timing diagram. Journal of Neuroscience. 26(35),

      8965-75.

Philiastides, M.G., Biele, G., Vavatzanidis, N., Kazzer, P., Heekeren, H.R., 2010. Temporal dynamics of

      prediction error processing during reward-based decision making. Neuroimage. 53(1), 221-32.

Ratcliff, R., Philiastides, M.G., Sajda, P., 2009. Quality of evidence for perceptual decision making is

      indexed by trial-to-trial variability of the EEG. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 106(16), 6539-44.

Romo, R., Hernandez, A., Zainos, A., & Salinas, E. 2003. Correlated neuronal discharges that increase

      coding efficiency during perceptual discrimination. Neuron. 38, 649-657.

Salinas, E., Hernandez, A., Zainos, A., Romo, R., 2000. Periodicity and firing rate as candidate neural

      codes for the frequency of vibrotactile stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience. 20, 5503–5515.

Shinkareva, S.V., Malave, V.L., Just, M.A., Mitchell, T.M., 2011. Exploring commonalities across

      participants in the neural representation of objects. Human Brain Mapping. doi:

      10.1002/hbm.21296.

Simanova, I., van Gerven, M., Oostenveld, R., Hagoort, P. 2010. Identifying object categories from

      event-related EEG: toward decoding of conceptual representations. PLoS One, 5(12), e14465.

Staeren, N., Renvall, H., De Martino, F., Goebel, R., Formisano, E., 2009. Sound categories are

    represented as distributed patterns in the human auditory cortex. Current Biology. 2009

    19(6):498-502.

Tzovara, A., Murray, M.M., Plomp, G., Herzog, M.H., Michel, C.M., De Lucia, M. Decoding stimulus-

    related information from single-trial EEG responses based on voltage topographies. Pattern

    Recognition (2011) doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2011.04.007




                                                   28
8. Table




           Table 1
                                                            Response time
                                          Living sounds                       Man-made sounds
           Subject number     Correctly          Incorrectly         Correctly        Incorrectly
                              categorized        categorized         categorized      categorized
                  S1          518ms*             811ms               517ms*           1070ms
                  S2          559ms*             1302ms              577ms*           1467ms
                  S3          690ms*             2775ms              853ms*           2576ms
                  S4          793ms*             1867ms              1117ms*          1538ms
                  S5          660ms*             1782ms              786ms*           1326ms


           Table1. Response time in milliseconds in response to living and man-made sounds when subjects
           could correctly indicate the sounds categories and when they could not guess. Asterisks denote
           response times to correctly categorized sounds that were significantly faster than those to
           uncategorized ones (t-tests; p<0.05). The difference between these response times was always
           significant for all subjects and for living and man-made sounds.
8. Table




           Table 2
                                                          Position order
                                         Living sounds                     Man-made sounds
           Subject number    Correctly          Incorrectly       Correctly          Incorrectly
                             categorized        categorized       categorized        categorized
                 S1          337                294               330*               246
                 S2          330                328               329                290
                 S3          349*               242               327                290
                 S4          291                274               275                223
                 S5          325                326               331                325


           Table2. Average position index of living sounds (second and third columns for correctly categorized
           and uncategorized ones, respectively) and man-made sounds (fourth and fifth columns for correctly
           categorized and uncategorized ones, respectively) for each of the five subjects. Asterisks indicate
           those position indexes of correctly categorized sounds that were significantly different from the
           uncategorized ones in the same category.
8. Table




           Table 3
                                     Living sounds                                  Man-made sounds
           Subject
                                               Position order                                   Position order
           number

                            #          Correctly      Ucategorized          #           Correctly      Uncategorized
                      overlapping    categorized                      overlapping      categorized
                         sounds                                          sounds
             S1             13            82               18              13              82                    8
             S2             8             82                9              10              107                   8
             S3             9             77               13              12              86                    7
             S4             16            76               18              11              122               11
             S5             14            61               23               8              101                   8




           Table 3. Number of living and man-made sounds to which subjects correctly or incorrectly answered
           depending on presentation order (first and fourth columns for living and man-made sounds,
           respectively). Average position order of these living sounds (second and third columns for correctly
           categorized and uncategorized ones, respectively) and man-made sounds (fifth and sixth columns for
           correctly categorized and uncategorized ones, respectively) for each of the five subjects. All position
           indexes of correctly categorized sounds were significantly later than the uncategorized ones in the
           same category.
9. Figure1
9. Figure2
 a.
                   X condition                                                1


                                                    X condition
                   Y condition
                                                    Y condition

                                                                                      2
                                                     N
                                       t
b. Discriminative time period estimation

            1 X model                                      1 Y model
      <Log Prob>




                                                     <Log Prob>




            0                                              0
                                            t                                             t
                                     H                                            H
c. Single-trial classification
  Example of single-trial classified as first condition

            1 X model                                             1 Y model
      Log Prob




                                                        Log Prob




           0                                                  0
                                            t                                             t
9. Figure3


a. Living uncategorized sounds: training dataset                         b.Man-made uncategorized sounds: training dataset
                                                                                                                    1µV



                                                                                                                    -1


            0.5                                                          0.5
  <Log P>




                                                               <Log P>
            0.3                                                          0.3


            0.1                                                          0.1

                  0      100       200      300        400ms                        0       100      200      300         400ms
c. Living sound: single-trial fitted to living model                     d. Living sound: single-trial fitted to man-made model
             1                                                            1
  Log P




                                                               Log P

             0                                                            0
                  0      100       200      300        400ms                        0       100      200      300         400ms
e. Man-made sound: single-trial fitted to living model                   f. Man-made sound: single-trial fitted to man-made model
             1                                                            1
  Log P




                                                               Log P




             0                                                            0
                  0      100       200      300        400ms                        0       100      200      300         400ms
9. Figure4



                       Uncategorized sounds: Discriminative time periods




             # Split




                                0        100       200       300      400ms
9. Figure5



                       Correctly categorized sounds:
                       Discriminative time periods




             # Split




                                0        100       200   300   400ms
