medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




               Longitudinal degeneration of microstructural and structural
                         connectivity patterns following stroke

        Lorenzo Pini, PhD1,2*, Mohammad Hadi Aarabi, PhD2* Alessandro Salvalaggio, MD, PhD1,2,
       Angela M. Colletta, MHS3, Nicholas V Metcalf , BS4,5, Joseph C Griffis , PhD6, Alex R Carter,
                   MD, PhD4, Gordon L. Shulman, PhD4,5, Maurizio Corbetta, MD1,2,7π

   1
     Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
   2
     Padova Neuroscience Center (PNC), University of Padova, Padova, Italy
   3
     Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
   4
     Department of Neurology, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, USA
   5
     Department of Radiology, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, USA
   6
     Department of Pediatrics, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
   7
     Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine (VIMM), Padova, Italy

   * These authors contributed equally to this work and share first authorship

   Keywords: structural connectivity; brain gradients; connectivity; diffusion weighted imaging

   Acknowledgements: We wish to thank the participants who participated in the study for their time.

   Funding: MC was supported by Italian Ministero della Salute, Brain connectivity measured with high-
   density electroencephalography: a novel neurodiagnostic tool for stroke (NEUROCONN; RF-2018-
   1236689); Horizon 2020 European School of Network Neuroscience - European School of Network
   Neuroscience (euSNN), H2020-SC5-2019-2 (Grant Agreement number 860563); Horizon 2020 research
   and innovation program; Visionary Nature Based Actions For Heath, Wellbeing & Resilience in Cities
   (VARCITIES), Horizon 2020-SC5-2019-2 (Grant Agreement number 869505); Italian Ministero della
   Salute: Eye-movement dynamics during free viewing as biomarker for assessment of visuospatial
   functions and for closed-loop rehabilitation in stroke (EYEMOVINSTROKE; RF-2019-12369300),
   HORIZON-ERC-SyG (Grant No.101071900), HORIZON- INFRA-2022 SERV (Grant No. 101147319)
   “EBRAINS 2.0: A Research Infrastructure to Advance Neuroscience and Brain Health”. MHA received
   support by the EU-project euSNN European School of Network Neuroscience (MSCA-ITN-ETN H2020-
   860563).

   Author contribution: LP: methodology, design, conceptualization, formal analysis, statistics,
   interpretation, data visualization and writing of the draft; MHA: methodology, design, conceptualization,
   formal analysis, interpretation, and writing of the draft; AS: revising the draft; AMC: Washington University
   stroke database; NVM: Washington University stroke database; JCG: Washington University stroke
   database; ARC: Washington University stroke database; GLS: Washington University stroke database;
   MC: data interpretation, design, conceptualization, supervision, and revising the draft.



   π Corresponding author:
   Prof. Maurizio Corbetta, Clinica Neurologica, Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, via
   Giustiniani 2, Padova 35131, Italy. Tel: +39-049 821 3600; Fax: +39-049 875 1770;
   maurizio.corbetta@unipd.it




        NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   ABSTRACT
   Stroke leads to neurological impairment through local and widespread brain damage. Whether
   distal and local diffusivity changes follow similar reorganization and behavior correlation
   trajectories is unclear. We examined acute and chronic brain diffusivity changes in stroke
   patients using both connectivity and microstructural parameters, hypothesizing similar
   trajectories linked with behavioral scores. This perspective study assessed first-time stroke
   patients at two weeks and three months using behavioral tests and diffusion MRI. We applied
   latent factorial analysis to behavioral and microstructural data from diffusion tensor imaging
   (DTI) and neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging (NODDI) outcomes. Structural
   connectivity gradients were computed from whole brain tractography. Statistical analyses
   included cross-sectional analyses, longitudinal linear mixed models, and the assessment of the
   relationship between microstructure and contralateral dysconnectivity. Finally, we explored the
   linear relationships between diffusivity parameters and behavior. Seventy-nine patients (60±12
   years) were enrolled, with 32 completing follow-up (3 months). A healthy group of n=33 (58±11
   years) was included. Factorial analysis identified five latent factors explaining about 50% of
   behavioural variances. We described three main DTI-NODDI microstructural maps and three
   main structural gradients, capturing around 50% of variance each. The analysis revealed acute
   alterations of microstructural and connectivity patterns. Longitudinally, significant degeneration
   in structural connectivity was observed, echoed in microstructural parameters. Behaviourally,
   global structural connectivity alterations were associated with acute cognitive deficits, though
   this link weakened at chronic follow-up. On the contrary, local disconnectivity patterns were
   linked mainly with motor deficits. Finally, we reported a significant association between global
   connectivity alterations and microstructural changes in tracts locally disconnected. Stroke
   significantly alters diffusivity patterns beyond the lesion, with no recovery over time. While
   acute-stage effects relate to behavior, long-term connectivity changes seem mostly uncoupled,
   suggesting they do not correlate with stroke recovery.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   1. INTRODUCTION
   Stroke is the second leading cause of death (about 10-12% of all deaths), and the first cause of
   disability worldwide.1,2 After a stroke, a cascade of cellular events unfolds in both the lesion and
   perilesional areas. Within the lesion, compromised blood supply triggers neural damage,
   disrupting cellular homeostasis.3 Immediate responses include excitotoxicity, oxidative stress,
   and inflammation, leading to neuronal injury and death.4–7 In the perilesional area, while
   hypoperfusion and hypoxia can cause damage, these effects may be reversible.8–11 Animal
   studies have shown that the perilesional region undergoes dynamic changes in cellular
   composition, synaptic connectivity, and gliosis.12 Importantly, both functional and structural
   changes occur at distances from the lesion, and these remote changes have been associated
   with behavioral deficits or recovery.13–16
   The post-stroke pattern brain alterations are complex due to the nature of the brain's
   connectome, that is the macro-scale brain connectivity properties, both functional (post-
   synaptic) and structural (axonal) pathways. Several studies have documented changes in the
   connectome after a stroke. Our group has pioneered methods to study alterations in functional
   connectivity (FC) measured by resting-state functional MRI between brain regions,17–20 known
   as 'connectional diaschisis'.21 Stroke lesions, regardless of location, cause characteristic
   patterns of FC alterations, including decreased inter-hemispheric correlation between homotopic
   regions and decreased intra-hemispheric negative correlation between typically segregated
   networks.20,22 These changes explain behavioral impairments across multiple domains and,
   when normalized over time, account for functional recovery.15,23,24 We also showed that
   functional changes are correlated with changes in structural connectivity (SC), albeit indirectly
   measured by embedding lesions in healthy subject atlases of white matter (WM)
   connections.25,26 Embedding lesions into normative atlases of functional/structural connections
   to explore the pattern of disconnection has become a powerful method to infer the effect of
   lesions onto brain networks.27–29
   While FC changes are well-documented, much less is known about directly measured
   alterations of the structural connectome and microstructure after focal stroke injury and
   recovery.30–33 In humans, diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) enables detection of
   structural alterations by sensitizing the MRI signal to water movement as a proxy of WM
   properties.34–36 Mathematical models like diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and biological models
   like neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging (NODDI) provide detailed insights into
   tissue microstructure 36–38.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   SC and microstructure studies in stroke have demonstrated both sub-acute and chronic
   changes in cross-sectional studies.39–46 Interestingly, while FC tends to normalize over time in
   relation to stroke recovery,15,23,47,48 longitudinal studies have shown progressive segregation of
   SC and WM degeneration across the brain post-stroke.30,32,33
   However, the spatial and temporal evolution of these structural changes, the relationship with
   behavior, and, particularly, how alterations in SC patterns are related to microstructural
   changes, remain poorly understood.
   The aim of this study was to measure the effect of stroke lesion on both SC and microstructural
   parameters. We focused on measures of whole-brain SC from diffusion imaging in the damaged
   and intact hemisphere, based on the inter- and intra-hemispheric functional changes reported in
   previous studies20,49,15, as well as on the microstructural diffusion parameters measured in the
   WM tracts and cortical gray matter disconnected by the lesion, based on a growing literature on
   the importance of disconnection in accounting for post-stroke behavioral deficits.27,50–53
   Furthermore, we measured both diffusion MRI and behavior with an in-depth behavioral battery
   that explored multiple domains of function23,54 at two time points: sub acutely within 2 weeks
   from the stroke and chronically at 3 months when most recovery has occurred.47,55,56 We were
   interested in two main questions. First, given previous work showing a robust coupling between
   network-level functional MRI alterations and structural disconnection indirectly measured
   through healthy atlases,26 we were interested in directly measuring alterations of whole brain SC
   and diffusion microstructure in WM and gray matter disconnected by the lesion. While previous
   studies have focused on graph metrics of diffusion changes post-stroke,30,32,33 this is the first
   study to combine measures of SC and microstructure both at the whole brain level and in
   regions disconnected by the lesion. Second, given that animal models suggest remodeling of
   WM pathways in support of recovery of function,57 and human data indicate an important role of
   functional network normalization,15,23,47,48 we were interested in measuring changes of whole
   brain SC and microstructure of disconnected tissue longitudinally, and their relationships with
   behavioral recovery. A positive relationship would support a role of WM reorganization and/or
   remodeling in mediating recovery of function, while no relationship would suggest that
   behavioral recovery is relatively independent of structural remodeling.


   2. METHODS
   Study design and participants
   Patients with first-time stroke were enrolled at Washington University in Saint Louis and were
   prospectively followed there at two-week three-month, and one-year intervals from the stroke
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   (data from the 1-year timepoint are not reported in the present study). Inclusion and exclusion
   criteria are listed in Supplementary Material S1.1. At each visit, patients underwent behavioral
   testing and MRI examination. Healthy controls (HC) were matched with the patients by age,
   sex, and years of education, and were studied twice one month apart. At the baseline and
   follow-up visits, patients and HC underwent the same behavioral testing and MRI scans. The
   workflow of the study is depicted in Fig. 1. Written informed consent was obtained from all
   participants in accordance with procedures established by the Washington University in Saint
   Louis Institutional Review Board.


   Behavioral assessment
   Participants underwent an extensive behavioral battery, administered typically on the same day
   as the imaging session and lasting approximately 2.5 hours, representing an update of a
   validated battery used in a previous cohort 54. The following cognitive domains were assessed:
   memory (Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised; Brief Visuospatial Memory Test-Revised;
   WMS-III Spatial Span, forward and backward); language (Boston diagnostic aphasia
   examination; nonword reading, subtest of the Delis-Kaplan executive function system - animal
   naming), visuospatial attention functions (Posner spatial cueing task, Mesulam Symbol
   Cancellation Test), executive functions (sorting card test and flanker test from the NIH Toolbox),
   and motor abilities (Action Research Arm Test, combined walking Index, lower extremity
   Motricity Index). In line with our previous publications 54,58,59, a dimensional reduction approach
   was applied by means of a hierarchical factor analysis with orthogonal (varimax) rotation to
   explore the latent variable structure. The resulting cognitive factors were compared between
   stroke control groups using a two-sample t-test, and between the sub-acute and chronic stroke
   phases with a paired t-test. A full description of sub-scores and processing details are reported
   in Supplementary Materials S1.2.


   MRI acquisition and preprocessing
   A 3 T Siemens Prisma scanner collected neuroimaging data. The anatomical sequence was 3D
   T1 Magnetization Prepared Rapid Acquisition Gradient Echo (MP2RAGE) (echo time/ repetition
   time/inversion time= 236 /1700/1000 ms, 176 axial slices, 1-mm slices, 240-mm FOV,
   256 × 256 acquisition matrix), 3D FLAIR (repetition time/echo time/inversion time =
   5000/394/1800 ms, 1 mm3 isotropic spatial resolution) and 3D T2 (repetition time/echo time =
   32/564 ms, 1 mm3 isotropic spatial resolution). A multi-shell diffusion scheme was acquired via
   a whole-brain coverage, and the b-values were 0, 300, 1000, and 2000 s/mm2. The diffusion
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   sampling directions were 16, 16, 32, and 60, respectively. The in-plane resolution was 2 mm
   with a slice thickness of 2 mm. Resting-state and task functional MRI scans were also collected
   but are not included in the present study. Preprocessing of the diffusion data is reported in
   Supplementary Materials S1.3.


   Global SC and local microstructural patterns computation
   Global patterns: connectivity gradients
   The MICAPIPE pipeline 60 was applied to compute the SC matrix from T1w and dMRI
   preprocessed data. A connectivity matrix was used to generate cortex-wide structural
   connectome gradients by applying diffusion map embedding algorithm, a non-linear approach
   which preserves the local geometry of the data and is robust against noise 61. Details are
   reported in Supplementary material S1.4. In line with the literature 62, we a priori selected the
   first 3 principal gradients, to provide a balanced representation of connectivity pattern,
   sufficiently detailed to capture the complexity of the data.
   To quantify the variability of the main gradients included in the analysis, we applied a gradient
   divergence (GD) measure for each brain parcel. First, we computed the group averaged-
   gradient maps from the normative sample; then for each patient and gradient we computed
   parcel-wise Euclidean distance, representing the distance between each parcel gradient value
   and the normative value from the healthy gradient templates, according to the following formula:

                                                ᇱ૚  ૚ ૛                  ᇱ࢔  ࢔ ૛
   where n represents the number of gradients retained from the analysis and G’ the gradient
   value at the parcel level from the reference template. Finally, the GD values were normalized
   between 0 and 1 (with a min-max scaling approach). GD was computed separately for intra- and
   inter-hemispheric gradients. For the network-wise analysis GD was averaged across Yeo’s
   network template63 (default mode network: DMN; dorsal-attention network: DAN; ventral-
   attention network: VAN; frontoparietal network: FPN; visual network: VIS; sensorimotor network:
   SMN; limbic network: LIM).
   Gradients values were computed also at network levels (average gradient score), according to
   the matching between Shaefer’s parcellation and 7 Yeo’s network template.
   Finally, to visualize the main connectivity features of the structural gradients, we assessed the
   relationship between the first two main gradients identifying the extreme parcels (from the
   control group) in the cartesian axis (left, right, up, and bottom) within specific network. The
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   structural pathways originating from these cartesian points for both intra- and inter-hemispheric
   connectivity were plotted from a normative streamline map 64.
   Local-dysconnectivity patterns: microstructural space
   Diffusion processed data were used to estimate both DTI and NODDI measurements. For DTI
   metrics, Dipy was employed 65. Diffusion data were truncated at b=1000 and the following DTI
   metrics were fitted: fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD), and
   radial diffusivity (RD). For NODDI, we employed the Accelerated Microstructure Imaging via
   Convex Optimization framework 66. We derived maps for neurite density index (NDI), orientation
   dispersion index (ODI), and isotropic volume fraction (ISOVF). Both DTI and NODDI maps were
   fed into a latent factor analysis. This analysis was performed at both individual-space and
   group-average level normalized to the MNI template (Supplementary material S1.5). Due to
   the exploratory nature of this latent DTI and NODDI approach, the same method was applied in
   an independent sample of n=1064 individuals from the Human Connectome Project (HCP)
   using multi-shell diffusion data (preprocessing details are reported in Supplementary materials
   S1.6).
   Microstructural analyses were focused exclusively on i) contralesional GM regions, and ii) WM
   tracts structurally disconnected from the lesion. Specifically, the lesion mask, binarized and
   registered to the MNI was flipped in the y-axis to derive the contralesional region. ROIs were
   further divided into GM and WM using the Harvard-Oxford atlas (25% probability map) as a
   mask. Microstructural latent profiles were assessed also at tract levels, considering the
   structural disconnection (SDC) patterns. Specifically, for each patient the corresponding
   structural disconnection map 50 was used as a mask to derive distal-connected averaged
   factorial values. Structural disconnection maps within the stroke sample were described through
   a principal component analysis and the components explaining more than 10% of the variance
   plotted as tractography maps for visualization purposes. We compared three different
   disconnection probability thresholds (40, 60, and 80%) to assess the robustness of the analysis.
   To avoid partial volume effect in the structural disconnection maps, we also computed a “shell”
   region surrounding the lesion which was removed from the tracts: an exclusion region map was
   created inflating of 4 voxels the lesion borders.


   Cross-sectional comparison between sub-acute stroke and controls
   Global connectivity differences
   First, we assessed whether the distributions of the relationship between the main gradients
   were significantly different between cohorts. We applied structural equation modeling (SEM) to
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   investigate the relationship between brain gradient metrics across different brain networks
   (details in Supplementary materials S1.7). For this analysis, we assessed whether group
   membership (HC vs Stroke) influenced the association between these two variables. Each
   network in the dataset was analyzed separately to determine network-specific patterns.
   Similarly, we intra- and inter-connectivity gradients were analyzed independently.
   To summarize and condense the information from gradient values and brain parcels, data were
   projected into a two-dimensional (2D) space using the Uniform Manifold Approximation and
   Projection (UMAP), a non-linear embedding technique that efficiently represents high-
                                                                                                                                    67
   dimensional data by preserving local and global structure along the principal axes                                                    .
   Specifically, for each individual (both stroke patients and controls), gradient values from each
   parcel were processed through UMAP, reducing the dimensionality of the data from parcels ×
   gradients to two principal components per subject. UMAP default parameters were applied as in
   our prior work 68. Following this dimensionality reduction, a multivariate analysis of covariance
   (MANCOVA) was conducted to examine group differences (stroke vs. controls) in the 2D UMAP
   space. The MANCOVA model included group as the main factor, controlled for covariates (age,
   education, and gender) to account for potential demographic effects. This approach enabled the
   isolation of group effects while controlling covariate influence. Further, a support vector machine
   (SVM) was applied to assess the accuracy of classifying controls and stroke (sub-acute) in the
   UMAP space. To this aim, the dataset was split into training (65%) and test (35%) set for
   hyperparameter            validation       with      a    Leave-One-Out             Cross-Validation           strategy.       The
   hyperparameter grid explored included variations in the regularization parameter C tested
   across a range of values from 0.1 to 10, incremented by 0.2 (C=[0.1,0.3,0.5,…,9.9]), kernel
   types and gamma values. The accuracy of the model was assessed in the test set.
   Since the GD metric was derived from the control group data, a direct comparison between
   controls and stroke patients was not conducted. Instead, a one-sample t-test was performed
   across stroke patients to identify parcels where GD values mainly deviated from zero. Here,
   zero represents a perfect alignment with the control group’s GD template, so positive t-scores
   indicate areas where the stroke group’s GD values differ from this baseline. For visualization,
   only parcels with t-scores exceeding 5 were plotted, highlighting the regions with the most
   pronounced deviations from the control-derived GD.
   Finally, we compared stroke and HC data from session 1 using directly gradient values. For
   stroke patients, the hemispheres ipsilesional to the lesion were flipped to the left hemisphere
   (when needed), while the right hemisphere was considered as the contralesional to the lesion
   hemisphere. Each parcel was classified as the corresponding functional Yeo’s 7 networks. An
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   absolute value was computed for each parcel before computing the network average value (to
   prevent extreme and opposite values in parcels belonging to the same network from skewing
   the mean towards 0 in one of the two groups). We applied an ordinal least square regression
   (OLS) to compare stroke and HC (session 1) covarying for age, gender, and education at
   network level. We tested the effects of diagnosis and networks, as well as the interaction effect
   (diagnosis × network) using network average gradient scores for each of the seven Yeo’s
   networks 63.
   Local disconnectivity differences
   Latent microstructural diffusion factors within SDC maps were compared between stroke and
   controls. First, we created a mean template from the control group for the latent factor maps.
   For each patient, the corresponding SDC masks were used as ROI in the control’s template.
   Values within the individual and template maps were compared by means of non-parametric
   independent test (Mann–Whitney U test), with significance set at p<0.05. Further, we applied a
   voxel-wise analysis comparing latent factors between controls and stroke (sub-acute), limited to
   the WM mask (from the Harvard-Oxford atlas – 25% probability map), described in
   Supplementary Materials S1.8.
   Disconnectivity probability and microstructural outcomes
   Further, we assessed whether the contralesional microstructural latent parameters could predict
   the likelihood of the contralesional area being disconnected from the lesion. To this aim, a linear
   regression analysis was applied including as independent variables all the factorial values within
   the GM contralesional tissues (DTI and NODDI) and the structural degree of dysconnectivity as
   the dependent variable. A bootstrapping approach (n=1000) was applied for the regression
   analysis to assess the robustness of the prediction (R2) value. Moreover, results from the
   bootstrapping procedure were used to compute F-statistics linked with the R2 distribution within
   each model, to assess the stability of the regression within the stroke sample according to the
   following formula:
                                                      ଶ / model degrees of freedom
                                             1  ଶ / residual degrees of freedom
   In a second analysis, we investigated whether GM regions disconnected from the lesions
   exhibited distinct diffusion values compared to unconnected regions at the sub-acute stage.
   Utilizing the SDC maps without applying a probability threshold, we calculated the probability of
   disconnections for each GM parcel (n=200 according to 69, including cerebellum parcels from
   Buckner atlas70. The factorial values averaged within the parcel exhibiting the highest probability
   were compared with those within the parcel displaying the lowest probability, employing a paired
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   t-test. Given that multiple parcels can share the lowest probability (equal to 0), we randomly
   selected a parcel with the lowest probability and repeated the procedure n=100 times. Each
   time, we compared the randomly selected low-value parcel with the single parcel exhibiting the
   highest value. In each iteration, the corresponding statistics (p-value) were recorded, and for
   each diffusion factor identified by the latent DTI-NODDI model, we compared the respective
   values. This approach was repeated both including and excluding subcortical regions (from the
   Oxford template) to avoid potential biases linked with the distribution of the lesions.


   Longitudinal analysis: sub-acute vs chronic stroke
   We employed a linear mixed model (LMM) analysis for comparing GD values longitudinally in
   stroke patients (sub-acute vs 3 months follow-up). The analysis was performed at network level
   (parcel-GD average), considering networks and individuals as random factors. This analysis
   was repeated for both intra- and inter-connectivity structural gradients and for ipsi- and
   contralesional hemispheres (for a total of n=4 models). For assessing the robustness of results,
   the analysis was performed both on the whole dataset (intention-to-treat like; ITT-L) and on the
   subset of patients with available dMRI data for both sub-acute and follow-up (per-protocol-
   analysis like; PPA-L). Finally, we compared microstructural latent factors longitudinally (sub-
   acute vs chronic) within the lesion and SDC masks, using the same LMM applied for gradients.
   As for the above analysis, we applied the model for both ITT-L and PPA-L samples. The main
   sociodemographic factors were covaried from the analysis for both GD and latent
   microstructural outcomes.


   Global and local connectivity association with behavior
   We assessed the relationships between behavioral latent factors with intra- and inter-
   hemispheric GD for sub-acute and chronic stages, separately. Specifically, for each cognitive
   factor, we assessed the linear relationship (Pearson’s correlation) with each structural gradient
   parcel-wise. This analysis was performed independently for intra- and inter-connectivity and
   significance was set at p<0.05 FDR corrected.
   The relationship between microstructural properties and behavioral performance was assessed
   by means of a linear regression approach. Specifically, latent diffusion values within SDC and
   lesion masks were included as predictors for the cognitive latent factors. The analysis was
   repeated independently for sub-acute and chronic stages. A p-value Bonferroni corrected for the
   number of behavioral scores was considered significant. Outliers exceeding two times the
   interquartile ranges were removed from the linear regression analysis to avoid the inclusion of
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   potential extreme values that could bias the model. For SDC we considered only the more
   lenient threshold (40%).


   Global connectivity organization and microstructural parameters association
   Finally, we assessed the relationship between gradient organization and microstructural
   parameters. Specifically, we aimed to relate whether changes from controls in the SC hierarchy
   (GD) were related to biological mechanisms captured by the microstructural space focusing on
   disconnected tracts. To this aim, we explored the relationship between global connectivity
   patterns (from structural gradients) with microstructural parameters in brain regions belonging to
   disconnected tracts (i.e., SDC) from the lesion. The DTI-NODDI factors computed within the
   SDC tracts were linearly related to the GD value, independent for intra and inter-connectivity
   and for the ipsilesional and contralesional hemisphere. First, we computed a global GD value
   averaging the value from each parcel. Microstructural parameters in the SDC ROI were used as
   predictors of the global GD. A p-value<0.05 was considered significant. Further, we perform this
   analysis at network level, averaging GD within the 7 Yeo’s network parcels. A p-value<0.05
   FDR-corrected was considered significant. This analysis was performed in sub-acute stroke
   patients. This analysis was performed considering SDC maps thresholded at the lenient cut-off
   (40%).


   Sensitivity and reproducibility analyses
   We performed several sensitivity analyses to check the robustness of cross-sectional,
   longitudinal and connectivity analyses. Further, we considered for the connectivity analysis the
   sample of patients with lesions involving mainly subcortical and non-subcortical regions. Details
   for these analyses are in Supplementary materials S1.9.


   3. RESULTS
   A total of 79 patients (age=60.1±11.5 years; education=13.3±2.5 years) and n=33 age-matched
   HC were included (Table 1). Patients and controls were matched for age (T=0.927, p=0.356),
   education (T=-0.897, p=0.372), and gender (X2=1.433, p=0.231). Among HC, n=29 individuals
   performed MRI exam (age=57±11; education=13.7±2.6), of whom n=22 repeated the MRI visit 1
   month apart. A total of 48 patients had available MRI data at the baseline visit (age=59±11;
   education=13.5±2.2) while n=26 repeated the exam at the 3 months follow-up (age=59±11
   years, education=13.8±2.2 years). As for the whole cohort, no differences were observed
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   between the stroke baseline imaging cohort and the cohort of controls performing MRI at the
   first session (age: T=-0.55; p=0.58; education: T=0.38; p=0.71; gender: X2=3.06: p=0.08).
   An overview of the maps derived from diffusion-weighted imaging is presented in Fig. 2,
   alongside the lesion frequency map and a visual representation of the main SDC patterns
   obtained through PCA.


   Latent behavioral factors
   A dimensional reduction approach was applied to characterize the latent space of behavioral
   scores in both stroke and HC. The latent factorial analysis (Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin=0.813), after
   excluding individuals with missing data exceeding the established threshold (n=59 for patients in
   the sub-acute stage and n=35 for follow-up) revealed 5 main latent factors explaining around
   50% of the behavioral variance. The first factor mainly loaded on verbal memory, language, and
   executive functions tests/items (variance=13.3%). The second (variance=12.2%) and third
   (variance=8.1%) factors loaded on right and left motor functions, respectively. The fourth
   (variance=6.4%) factor mapped onto visual memory, working memory, and general attention
   performance, while the fifth (variance=6.38%) related mainly to lateralized visuospatial scores
   on the Posner task. Due to the left-right nature of the last factor, we considered the absolute
   values. Scores from these factors were significantly different between HC and stroke at the sub-
   acute stage (p<0.05)(Fig. 3). The factorial analysis was repeated considering only the stroke
   (acute) sample, mirroring the results in the whole cohort (Supplementary Fig. S1). Compared
   to the chronic stage, patients at 3 months follow-up (n=33 for both observations) recovered in
   the motor domain (left: p=0.046; right: p=0.002), in lateralized visual attention (p=0.030), while
   language-verbal memory and visuospatial memory-attention factors improved non significantly
   (Supplementary Fig. S1).


   Global disconnectivity patterns
   The anatomical quantification of the SC gradients in HC was assessed both qualitatively and
   quantitively, showing that the identified structural latent patterns reflect the primary axes of WM
   fiber organization, capturing key variability along postero-anterior, ventral-dorsal, and left-right
   (callosal) directions. Specifically, in HC, for the intra-hemispheric connectivity the first gradient
   (intraG1) explained 22% of variance, the second gradient (intraG2) explained 17%, and the third
   gradient (intraG3) explained around 13% of variance. For the inter-hemispheric connectivity,
   interG1, interG2, and interG3 explained 32%, 24%, and 15% of the variance, respectively. See Fig.

   2 for an overview of the gradients, Supplementary materials S2.1 for an anatomical
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   description, and Supplementary Fig. S2 for the parcel-wise top 10% gradient values. The
   spatial patterns of these gradients were confirmed in controls at the first and second sessions
   (Supplementary Fig. S2). For the inter-hemispheric analysis n=4 patients were excluded due
   to at least a single parcel in the connectivity matrix with no values, not compatible with the
   gradient algorithm computation. Similar average-group patterns were found between stroke
   (sub-acute) and controls highlighting that gradients values captured similar connectivity axes in
   the two groups (Supplementary Fig. S3). The relationship between                                          intraG1    and    intraG2

   highlighted a SC pattern moving from a posterior-anterior axis (highest                                        intraG1   values),
   transitioning to a superior-inferior pattern (lowest intraG2 values), and returning to an anterior-
   posterior axis, following a 'virtual' U-shaped trajectory towards a positive relationship between
   interG2 and interG1 values (Fig. 4-A). The inter-connectivity relationship seems to capture corpus

   callosum anatomy moving from the anterior (highest interG1 values) to the posterior (lowest
   interG1 values) portion (Fig. 4-B-C).

   For the cross-sectional differences between controls and sub-acute stroke, first, we assessed
   whether the distribution of the relationship between the main gradients was similar between
   patients and controls. As shown in Fig. 4, the pattern, qualitatively, was similar between
   cohorts, although the former showed a more widespread distribution. SEM results showed
   significant differences for intraG1 and intraG2 mapping to SMN (Z=-2.13; p=0.033), DAN (Z=-2.68;
   p=0.007), and DMN (Z=3.07; p=0.002). The remaining networks were not significant (VAN: Z=-
   1.60; p=0.109; LIM: Z=-1.53; 0.125) or showed a trend towards significance (VIS: Z=1.92,
   p=0.055; FPN: Z=-1.94; p=0.052). For interG1 and interG2, sub-acute stroke patients and controls
   differed for the relationship within the VIS (Z=-8.76; p<0.001), SMN (Z=-3.27; p=0.001), DAN
   (Z=-4.78; p<0.001), VAN (Z=-4.99; p<0.001), and LIM (Z=-3.58; p<0.001). DMN and FPN
   showed no significant results (p>0.6). Second, the MANCOVA analysis on the UMAP space
   was conducted to assess these differences in the 2D-space (UMAP projection of parcel ×
   gradient space). We found significant differences between sub-acute stroke and controls for all
   the four outcomes assessed for both intra-connectivity (ipsilesional hemisphere: F=6.70,
   p=0.0022; contralesional: F=3.43, p=0.0376) and inter-connectivity (ipsilesional: F=8.51,
   p=0.0005; contralesional: F=4.01, p=0.0225). Further, we assess the classification accuracy of
   this 2D space segregating controls and stroke by means of a SVM model. SVM, when applied
   to predict stroke and HC data points using UMAP space pooling contralesional and ipsilesional
   data computed from inter-connectivity gradients, reached a classification accuracy in the test set
   of 89% (Fig 5-A). When the SVM model was applied to intra-connectivity gradients we reached
   a classification accuracy of 96% in the test set (Fig 5-A). Details for the SVM hyperparameters
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   validation are reported in the Supplementary material S2.2. Further, we performed a finer
   analysis at parcel-levels, assessing differences between stroke and controls by means of a one-
   sample t-test applied on GD values. Results confirmed the widespread differences at cortical
   levels, with the highest t-score widely distributed among the cortical parcels (Fig 5-B). These
   results were confirmed at the network-level analyzing directly gradient values (Supplementary
   material S2.3 and Supplementary Fig. S4).
   Subsequently, we quantified the longitudinal differences in stroke, comparing sub-acute (2
   weeks) and chronic follow-up (3 months). This analysis was performed both in the whole sample
   (ITT-L) and reproduced in the subset of patients with complete longitudinal data (PPA-L). For
   the ITT-L sample, LMM analysis for the ipsilesional connectivity between sub-acute and chronic
   stage in stroke patients showed significant time effect for both intraGD (T=3.406; p=0.001) and
   interGD (T=3.035; p=0.003). A significant effect was observed also when considering GD values

   for the contralesional hemisphere (intraGD, T=3.431, p=0.001; interGD; T=2.667, p=0.008).
   Specifically, GD increased over time, suggesting an increase in the difference of the
   connectivity patterns with the controls’ template (Fig 5-C; Supplementary Table S1-S2).


   Local disconnectivity patterns
   Microstructural factorial space description
   DTI and NODDI maps from the two sessions of the HC from the WashU showed high
   reproducibility (Supplementary Fig. S5-A). From these maps, we reported 3 main latent
   diffusion factors with peculiar features in the cohort of HC from the WashU. The first factor
   (dwiF1) loaded on DTI diffusivity metrics (AD, RD, and MD) and ISOVF from NODDI. This factor
   explained around 52% of the variance. Anatomically, higher values were predominantly
   observed in the CSF, aligning with the loadings on diffusion metrics. The second factor (dwiF2)
   loaded on FA and ODI, with opposite directions, indicating a latent space capturing diffusivity
   orientation explained around 28% of the variance. Indeed, anatomically, divergent values were
   expressed in the GM and WM tissues, the latter showing lower values (thus higher anisotropy in
   the WM). The third factor (dwiF3) loaded on both FA and ICVF, along the same direction,
   explaining 15% of the variance of the data (Fig. 4-D-E). This last factor showed relative spatial
   similarity with the myelin map distribution from Glasser et al. (2016), suggesting a
   microstructural pattern following the main (and myelinated) tracts (Fig. 4-F). The latent
   microstructural space reported in the second session of the cohort of HC from WashU was used
   to project microstructural data of stroke patients. After this transformation, four individuals were
   excluded from the subsequent analysis due to differences with the control cohort exceeding an
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   arbitrary threshold of similarity with the template (spatial correlation r<0.2) for the dwiF1.
   Although visual quality control showed similar diffusion factor patterns, these patients were
   removed to avoid potential biases in the microstructural analysis. An additional analysis
   computing the latent space independently on the stroke cohort at the acute stage and 3 months,
   echoed the findings in the HC (Supplementary Fig. S5-B). These results were in line with the
   findings on the HCP dataset (Supplementary Material S2.4) and both at group level and single
   subjects’ space (Supplementary Fig. S6). Moreover, factors were highly reproducible across
   the two independent datasets (WashU and HCP), with an average correlation above 0.9 for
   loadings patterns (F1: sess1-sess2 r=0.973, WashU-HCP r=0.967; F2: sess1-sess2 r=0.974,
   WashU-HCP r=0.994; F3: sess1-sess2 r=0.941, WashU-HCP r=0.939) (Supplementary Fig.
   S6).
   Two main structural disconnection patterns were observed running a descriptive PCA on the
   SDC maps, representing more than 66% of the variance. These components mapped within the
   left and the right hemisphere, respectively (Fig. 2). In line with the lesion frequency map (Fig. 2)
   the right disconnection pattern captured 42% of the variance, compared to the left disconnection
   pattern (23%). SDC maps from individual lesions were used as masks for the latent
   microstructural parameters analysis. SDC maps showed significant differences comparing
   stroke acutely with controls for the second factor (dwiF2) when considering a probability
   disconnection of 60% (U=1277; p=0.033) and 80% (U=1135; p=0.024), while the 40% threshold
   showed a trend towards significance (p=0.06). The remaining factors were not significantly
   different from stroke and controls (p>0.6)(Fig. 6-A). A significant involvement of the second
   factor was confirmed at the voxel-wise level. Higher dwiF2 values were observed in stroke
   patients acutely compared to controls (p<0.05 FWE-corrected), while no significant voxels were
   reported for dwiF1 and dwiF3 (Supplementary Material S2.5 and Supplementary Fig. S7).
   Higher dwiF2 values in stroke are indicative of lower anisotropy in the WM, consistent with
   reduced WM integrity and the main involvement of the subcortical WM in stroke and related
   disconnection 26,51,53. Next, we were interested in measuring the effect of disconnection on the
   contralesional GM. Accordingly, we ran a linear regression analysis including microstructural
   GM contralesional values from dwiF1, dwiF2, and dwiF3 as independent variables and structural
   GM contralesional probability disconnection as the dependent variable. We found significant
   results at the sub-acute stage (adjr2=0.625; p<0.0001) for both dwiF2 (coef:-0.244; p<0.001) and
   dwiF3 (coef:0.132; p=0.012). Higher disconnectivity probability was accompanied by lower dwiF2

   and higher dwiF3, suggestive of pathological mechanisms in the connected GM tissue (e.g.,
   neuroinflammation and decreased dendrite density/arborizations)37. Results were echoed by the
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   bootstrapping procedure that showed a significant effect for the structural model (F=21.65,
   p<0.0001)(Fig. 6-B). This result indicates a significant linear relationship between the degree of
   WM disconnection and the alteration of the diffusion properties of the contralesional GM
   hemisphere. To confirm these findings, we ran a separate analysis in which we compared
   parcels with the highest and the lowest probability of disconnections. A significant effect was
   found for dwiF2 (Fig. 6-C). The result was highly stable across the random selection of parcels
   with the lowest probability (n=500). Moreover, dwiF2 showed the highest differences between
   parcels compared to dwiF1 and dwiF3 assessed with a one-way ANOVA (F=347, p<0.00001;
   np2=0.32). The results were replicated when excluding the subcortical parcels from the analysis
   (F=26.3, p<0.00001; np2=0.15), controlling for lesion location (Supplementary Fig. S8).
   Longitudinal changes in latent microstructural parameters within SDC masks using LMM were
   significant for       dwiF3    at different disconnectivity thresholds (SDC-40%: T=2.124, CI[2.5-
   97.5]=0.113-0.752, p=0.043; SDC-60%: T=2.747, CI[2.5-97.5]=0.022-0.133, p=0.011; SDC-
   80%: T=2.128, CI[2.5-97.5]=0.006-0.150, p=0.043). Specifically, we found that SDC regions
   (independently by the threshold applied) showed on average lower values at the chronic stage
   compared to the sub-acute stage, suggestive of longitudinal degeneration (Fig.6-D). Results
   were confirmed when including the PPA-L cohort considering both the gradients (n=26 stroke
   patients for intra-connectivity and n=22 for inter-connectivity analysis) and the latent
   microstructural space (Supplementary Table S1-S2). Additionally, a post-hoc sensitivity
   analysis was conducted, focusing exclusively on the SDC maps, to evaluate whether the latent
   factor computed at the individual level (without projection into the HC-session space) would
   yield similar results. The analysis on the ITT-L sample demonstrated stable and consistent
   findings, with significant changes in the same direction appearing only in dwiF3 across all
   probability thresholds (SDC-40%: T=3.686, CI[2.5-97.5]=0.027-0.152, p=0.001; SDC-60%:
   T=4.062, CI[2.5-97.5]=0.029-0.176, p<0.001; SDC-80%: T=3.131, CI[2.5-97.5]=0.039-0.199,
   p=0.005). No significant differences emerged considering dwiF1 and dwiF2.


   Correlation with behavior
   We assessed the linear relationship between SC gradients and behavior. At the sub-acute
   stage, stroke-related changes in intra-hemispheric structural gradients were significantly
   associated with deficits in language-verbal memory, visuospatial and spatial memory, and
   attention-neglect (Fig 7-A). Language-verbal-memory deficits mapped to perisylvian, prefrontal,
   and parietal cortices of the left hemisphere, while both visuospatial memory and
   attention/neglect functions mapped widely to prefrontal, parietal, and temporal regions of both
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   hemispheres, more strongly on the right hemisphere. Visuospatial memory and attention/neglect
   deficits mapped significantly to inter-hemispheric structural gradients, consistent with a view of
   inter-hemispheric competition for spatial attention.72 In contrast, motor deficits were not
   significantly associated with changes in structural gradients (Fig 7-A). All the results were FDR-
   corrected (p<0.05). At the chronic stage, we found no significant behavioral association for the
   intra-hemispheric GD. A weak association for the visuospatial-memory-attention and the
   lateralized-neglect components was reported, mapping mainly in the parietal and occipital
   regions of the left hemisphere. Data reporting significant correlations for both sub-acute and
   chronic follow-up are shown in the Supplementary Fig. S9.
   In contrast to the structural gradients, a significant relationship occurred between motor left
   deficits and SDC surviving multiple comparison correction (r2=0.37; p=0.003). The remaining
   behavioral factors did not show significant associations (Fig. 7-B). The relationship between
   SDC microparameters and left motor deficits remained significant at the chronic stage (left:
   r2=0.415; p<0.001), with right motor scores showing a trend towards significance (r2=0.133;
   p=0.058)(Fig. 7-B). Further, a significant association emerged within the SDC maps the
   visuospatial-memory-attention components not surviving the significant threshold (r2=0.25;
   p=0.046), while the association with the language-verbal-memory component survived the
   statistical threshold (r2=0.190; p=0.008).


   Structural gradient and local disconnectivity association
   For this analysis, only dwiF2 and dwiF3 were considered, given the marginal contribution of dwiF1
   to the results. Microstructural outcomes within the SDC mask (40% cut-off) were significantly
   predictive of the global GD value across all comparisons considered: intra-hemispheric
   contralesional (R² = 0.186, p = 0.020), intra-hemispheric ipsilesional (R² = 0.224, p = 0.008),
   inter-hemispheric contralesional (R² = 0.228, p = 0.011), and inter-hemispheric ipsilesional (R² =
   0.167, p = 0.041). Specifically, as GD increased, in the disconnected WM tracts dwiF2 increased,
   while dwiF3 decreased, indicating axonal disorganization/degeneration due to increased extra-
   axonal space.37 Detailed results are provided in Supplementary Fig. S10 and Supplementary
   Table S3. At the network level, these results were confirmed (except for inter-hemispheric
   ipsilesional connectivity), showing a trend involving most of the networks considered. This is
   consistent with the GD results, which indicate a global network pattern (Supplementary Fig.
   S10).


   Sensitivity analysis comparing results from cortical and subcortical lesions
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   Sensitivity analysis largely confirmed the above results when comparing cortical and subcortical
   lesions, suggesting robust gradient alterations irrespective of lesion location (Supplementary
   Material S2.6 and Fig. S11).


   4. DISCUSSION
   This is the first study that combines large-scale gradient mapping and microstructural analysis
   of disconnection in stroke. We implemented novel methods to compute gradients of SC across
   the brain, which can capture the similarity of tractography-derived connectivity patterns between
   brain regions. We replicated our results in a robust structural gradient organization in a large
   dataset of controls (HCP) and demonstrated how focal stroke lesions widely affect this
   organization and worsen longitudinally. For local microstructural analysis, we applied novel
   embedding methods to extract latent variables that capture variability across both DTI and
   NODDI measures, describing microstructural properties voxel-wise. This approach was
   validated in two independent cohorts and demonstrated longitudinal changes in stroke patients,
   coupled with structural gradient changes. Finally, we demonstrated how divergence in SC
   gradients relates to underlying microstructural changes, providing a mechanistic link between
   global network reorganization and local tissue properties.
   We applied the framework of gradient mapping,73 to high quality dMRI data. The three gradient
   maps summarize the main axes of structural organization, in line with previous studies using the
   same methods,61,74,75 while only partially overlap with functional gradient maps derived from
   fMRI.61,73,74 In stroke, the gradient analysis showed widespread differences at the sub-acute
   stage, as compared to controls, both in intra-hemispheric connectivity, ipsilesional and
   contralesional to the lesion, and inter-hemispheric connectivity. The abnormalities were
   widespread across all networks, in line with previous studies that found global alterations of SC
   after focal stroke lesions,33,39,40 and intra-hemispheric and inter-hemispheric changes in
   functional networks post-stroke.15,23,76,77 The structural changes were large enough that a stroke
   patient could be distinguished from HC at the single subject level with an accuracy of around
   90%. When the structural gradients were re-measured at 3 months post-stroke we showed a
   growing deviation from the HC’s template. This is interesting as local synaptic sprouting and
   remodeling of the WM have been proposed as a mechanism of recovery in animal models,57,78
   and most recovery has already occurred at three months.79 However, our results are in line with
   other human studies showing progressive structural degeneration following stroke.30,41,43 The
   structural degeneration of WM connections is in stark contrast with functional data showing a
   normalization of FC correlating with recovery of function.24,48 Since at the sub-acute stage,
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   changes in FC are closely aligned with alterations of SC,26 it derives in the course of recovery
   structural and FC trajectories diverge, with structure degenerating and function normalizing
   likely based on synaptic reweighting of surviving connections. This adaptive capacity for FC
   might drive behavioral recovery especially in more redundant cognitive networks where the link
   between structure and function is weaker74 (see below behavioral correlation).
   One of the most influential results in the last decade has been realizing the importance of
   disconnection on brain networks caused by focal lesions.23,76 Recent methods have been
   developed to infer (indirectly) patterns of functional and structural disconnection based on
   normative atlases.50,80 Here we combine for the first-time direct measures of diffusivity
   microstructure to the analysis of disconnected brain regions after focal stroke lesions and relate
   these changes to global changes of connectivity measured with the structural gradients.
   First, we described a latent microstructural space showing high reliability in condensing complex
   diffusion metrics into a few stable and interpretable components. Three latent diffusion factors
   were identified robustly in both HCP and WashU cohorts, with high replicability across sessions
   and participants. Next, we mapped these latent diffusion microparameters to gray and WM
   regions identified as disconnected.50 We found at the sub-acute stage disorganization in
   disconnected WM and disconnected cortical parcels (mapping on dwiF2 values). This pattern is
   consistent with decreased FA in WM, hence fiber disorganization, and decreased ODI in the
   GM, hence loss of neurite dispersion suggestive of cortical deafferentation. Hence disconnected
   regions show sub-acutely a loss of long-range WM pathways and an impact on the
   corresponding homotopic contralesional cortical regions. Interestingly, these disconnected
   regions further degenerate from 2 weeks to 3 months as indicated by a decrease of dwiF3, a
   measure indicative of myelination.81 Therefore in line with a previous study,30 WM fibers and
   gray matter disconnected from the lesion showed degeneration over time post-stroke.
   Interestingly, the changes of microparameters in disconnected tissue partially but significantly
   explained the SC distance between stroke patients and HC. Higher dwiF2 and lower dwiF3
   predicted GD values in stroke, suggesting a complex relationship between structural gradient
   divergence and microstructural alterations. While this result is trivial for large lesions that
   disconnect large parts of the brain, it is less clear for small lesions that produce smaller maps of
   disconnection, yet apparently still produce large alterations of large-scale structural
   organization. In previous work we have estimated that nearly 20% of all region pairs were
   estimated to be either directly or indirectly disconnected by stroke lesions in our sample, with
   extensive disconnections associated primarily with damage to deep WM locations.26,54
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   We measured behavior using a large battery, finding five factors that explained about 50% of the
   behavioral variance across groups and time points. This low dimensionality is consistent with
   the factorial-structure found in stroke,82,58 and in other conditions such as brain tumors83 and
   neurodegeneration.59 While in stroke they likely reflect both the correlated topography of
   vascular lesions84 and the low dimensionality of FC abnormalities,15,20 more generally they are
   thought to reflect loss of neural entropy85 caused by any neurological disorder.
   Interestingly, different behavioral deficits showed a dissociated pattern of behavioral correlation
   with SC. Cognitive functions robustly correlated at the sub-acute stage with structural gradients.
   The topography was highly specific with left hemisphere alterations related to verbal- language-
   memory, bilateral alterations for visuospatial-memory-attention and lateralized attention.
   Interestingly, motor deficits did not correlate with changes in structural organization. This result
   is in line with previous studies in which distributed intra- and inter-hemispheric FC patterns
   correlated with sub-acute deficits in language, attention, and memory, but not visual or motor
   deficits20 (as noted, the current work was based on an independent sample than our previously
   published stroke papers. Moreover, imaging data was collected using a different scanner and for
   behavioral data was used a modified battery that eliminated some subtests and added others).
   Structural gradient changes at 3 months were weakly related with cognitive tasks, which
   indicates a decoupling between SC and cognitive performance. Given normalization of FC
   correlates with the behavioral recovery of cognitive functions,48 our results show that behavioral
   recovery depends on synaptic reweighting of residual structural connections in the context of
   longitudinal structural degeneration. This view is also consistent with recent work in non-human
   primates highlighting the role of transmodal association cortex in post-stroke recovery.24
   In contrast to the cognitive domains, motor deficits (sub-acute and chronic stages) correlated
   with microstructural parameters of disconnected regions. Since the lesion distribution was
   mainly located in the central WM underlying brain motor regions, and the main patterns of
   disconnection were correspondingly centered around the central sulcus including the
   corticospinal tracts, the association between motor deficits and the microstructure of
   disconnected regions indicates the importance of local damage/disconnection in accounting for
   motor and sensory deficits in line with our previous work.20,48,51,54,58
   This study is not without limitations. Gradient mapping is sensitive to methodological choices,
   which can affect the reproducibility and comparability of results. Further, the interpretation of
   gradients is more intricate compared to more established methods, including the lack of
   consensus for interpreting gradient results. Despite these limitations, several strengths should
   be highlighted. The use of multi-shell diffusion data has significantly improved the tractography,
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   contributing to the reliability of our findings. The longitudinal aspect of our data collection has
   provided valuable insights into the temporal evolution of stroke. Moreover, the high-level
   analysis that integrates microstructural, structural organization and behavioral data has unveiled
   latent patterns and relationships that may not be apparent through traditional methods.




   REFERENCES

   1.     Fan, J. et al. Global Burden, Risk Factor Analysis, and Prediction Study of Ischemic
   Stroke, 1990–2030. Neurology 101, (2023).
   2.     Johnson, C. O. et al. Global, regional, and national burden of stroke,
   1990&#x2013;2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. The
   Lancet Neurology 18, 439–458 (2019).
   3.    Khoshnam, S. E., Winlow, W., Farzaneh, M., Farbood, Y. & Moghaddam, H. F.
   Pathogenic mechanisms following ischemic stroke. Neurol Sci 38, 1167–1186 (2017).
   4.     Anrather, J. & Iadecola, C. Inflammation and Stroke: An Overview. Neurotherapeutics
   13, 661–670 (2016).
   5.    Broughton, B. R. S., Reutens, D. C. & Sobey, C. G. Apoptotic Mechanisms After
   Cerebral Ischemia. Stroke 40, (2009).
   6.     Maddahi, A. & Edvinsson, L. Cerebral ischemia induces micro vascular pro-inflammatory
   cytokine expression via the MEK/ERK pathway. J Neuroinflammation 7, 14 (2010).
   7.    Moskowitz, M. A., Lo, E. H. & Iadecola, C. The Science of Stroke: Mechanisms in
   Search of Treatments. Neuron 67, 181–198 (2010).
   8.      Dirnagl, U., Iadecola, C. & Moskowitz, M. A. Pathobiology of ischaemic stroke: an
   integrated view. Trends in Neurosciences 22, 391–397 (1999).
   9.     Hossmann, K. Viability thresholds and the penumbra of focal ischemia. Annals of
   Neurology 36, 557–565 (1994).
   10.     Pulsinelli, W. Pathophysiology of acute ischaemic stroke. The Lancet 339, 533–536
   (1992).
   11.     Witte, O. W., Bidmon, H.-J., Schiene, K., Redecker, C. & Hagemann, G. Functional
   Differentiation of Multiple Perilesional Zones after Focal Cerebral Ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
   Metab 20, 1149–1165 (2000).
   12.   Nudo, R. J. Recovery after brain injury: mechanisms and principles. Front. Hum.
   Neurosci. 7, (2013).
   13.   Murphy, T. H. & Corbett, D. Plasticity during stroke recovery: from synapse to behaviour.
   Nat Rev Neurosci 10, 861–872 (2009).
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   14.    Nishibe, M., Barbay, S., Guggenmos, D. & Nudo, R. J. Reorganization of Motor Cortex
   after Controlled Cortical Impact in Rats and Implications for Functional Recovery. Journal of
   Neurotrauma 27, 2221–2232 (2010).
   15.      Siegel, J. S., Shulman, G. L. & Corbetta, M. Mapping correlated neurological deficits
   after stroke to distributed brain networks. Brain Struct Funct 227, 3173–3187 (2022).
   16.    Silasi, G. & Murphy, T. H. Stroke and the connectome: how connectivity guides
   therapeutic intervention. Neuron 83, 1354–68 (2014).
   17.     Carter, A. R. et al. Upstream dysfunction of somatomotor functional connectivity after
   corticospinal damage in stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 26, 7–19 (2012).
   18.   Carter, A. R. et al. Resting interhemispheric functional magnetic resonance imaging
   connectivity predicts performance after stroke. Annals of Neurology 67, 365–375 (2010).
   19.    He, B. J. et al. Breakdown of Functional Connectivity in Frontoparietal Networks
   Underlies Behavioral Deficits in Spatial Neglect. Neuron 53, 905–918 (2007).
   20.    Siegel, J. S. et al. Disruptions of network connectivity predict impairment in multiple
   behavioral domains after stroke. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, (2016).
   21.       Carrera, E. & Tononi, G. Diaschisis: past, present, future. Brain 137, 2408–2422 (2014).
   22.     Grefkes, C. & Fink, G. R. Connectivity-based approaches in stroke and recovery of
   function. The Lancet Neurology 13, 206–216 (2014).
   23.     Corbetta, M., Siegel, J. S. & Shulman, G. L. On the low dimensionality of behavioral
   deficits and alterations of brain network connectivity after focal injury. Cortex 107, 229–237
   (2018).
   24.     Nashed, J. Y., Gale, D. J., Gallivan, J. P. & Cook, D. J. Changes in cortical manifold
   structure following stroke and its relation to behavioral recovery in the male macaque. Nat
   Commun 15, 9005 (2024).
   25.     Griffis, J. C., Metcalf, N. V., Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Damage to the shortest
   structural paths between brain regions is associated with disruptions of resting-state functional
   connectivity after stroke. NeuroImage 210, 116589 (2020).
   26.    Griffis, J. C., Metcalf, N. V., Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Structural Disconnections
   Explain Brain Network Dysfunction after Stroke. Cell Reports 28, 2527-2540.e9 (2019).
   27.    Boes, A. D. et al. Network localization of neurological symptoms from focal brain lesions.
   Brain 138, 3061–3075 (2015).
   28.    Salvalaggio, A., De Filippo De Grazia, M., Zorzi, M., Thiebaut De Schotten, M. &
   Corbetta, M. Post-stroke deficit prediction from lesion and indirect structural and functional
   disconnection. Brain 143, 2173–2188 (2020).
   29.   Thiebaut De Schotten, M., Foulon, C. & Nachev, P. Brain disconnections link structural
   connectivity with function and behaviour. Nat Commun 11, 5094 (2020).
   30.    Egorova-Brumley, N. et al. Changes in White Matter Microstructure Over 3 Years in
   People With and Without Stroke. Neurology 100, (2023).
   31.     Koch, P. J. et al. The structural connectome and motor recovery after stroke: predicting
   natural recovery. Brain 144, 2107–2119 (2021).
   32.    Li, Y., Yu, Z., Wu, P. & Chen, J. The disrupted topological properties of structural
   networks showed recovery in ischemic stroke patients: a longitudinal design study. BMC
   Neurosci 22, 47 (2021).
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   33.    Schlemm, E. et al. Structural brain networks and functional motor outcome after stroke—
   a prospective cohort study. Brain Communications 2, fcaa001 (2020).
   34.   Basser, P. J., Mattiello, J. & LeBihan, D. MR diffusion tensor spectroscopy and imaging.
   Biophysical Journal 66, 259–267 (1994).
   35.     Beaulieu, C. The basis of anisotropic water diffusion in the nervous system – a technical
   review. NMR in Biomedicine 15, 435–455 (2002).
   36.   Mori, S. & Zhang, J. Principles of Diffusion Tensor Imaging and Its Applications to Basic
   Neuroscience Research. Neuron 51, 527–539 (2006).
   37.   Kamiya, K., Hori, M. & Aoki, S. NODDI in clinical research. Journal of Neuroscience
   Methods 346, 108908 (2020).
   38.     Zhang, H., Schneider, T., Wheeler-Kingshott, C. A. & Alexander, D. C. NODDI: Practical
   in vivo neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging of the human brain. NeuroImage 61,
   1000–1016 (2012).
   39.     Cheng, B. et al. Altered topology of large-scale structural brain networks in chronic
   stroke. Brain Communications 1, fcz020 (2019).
   40.     Crofts, J. J. et al. Network analysis detects changes in the contralesional hemisphere
   following stroke. NeuroImage 54, 161–169 (2011).
   41.    Egorova, N. et al. Pervasive White Matter Fiber Degeneration in Ischemic Stroke. Stroke
   51, 1507–1513 (2020).
   42.    Liu, X. et al. Aberrant dynamic Functional-Structural connectivity coupling of Large-scale
   brain networks in poststroke motor dysfunction. NeuroImage: Clinical 37, 103332 (2023).
   43.  Nemati, P. R. et al. Brain network topology early after stroke relates to recovery. Brain
   Communications 4, fcac049 (2022).
   44.  Shi, L. et al. Abnormal Organization of White Matter Network in Patients with No
   Dementia after Ischemic Stroke. PLoS One 8, e81388 (2013).
   45.    Zhang, J. et al. Disrupted structural and functional connectivity networks in ischemic
   stroke patients. Neuroscience 364, 212–225 (2017).
   46.   Zhang, X. et al. Analysis of Correlation Between White Matter Changes and Functional
   Responses in Post-stroke Depression. Front. Aging Neurosci. 13, 728622 (2021).
   47.    Ramsey, L. E. et al. Normalization of network connectivity in hemispatial neglect
   recovery. Annals of Neurology 80, 127–141 (2016).
   48.    Siegel, J. S. et al. Re-emergence of modular brain networks in stroke recovery. Cortex
   101, 44–59 (2018).
   49.    Baldassarre, A. et al. Large-scale changes in network interactions as a physiological
   signature of spatial neglect. Brain 137, 3267–3283 (2014).
   50.   Foulon, C. et al. Advanced lesion symptom mapping analyses and implementation as
   BCBtoolkit. GigaScience 7, (2018).
   51.    Salvalaggio, A., De Filippo De Grazia, M., Zorzi, M., Thiebaut de Schotten, M. &
   Corbetta, M. Post-stroke deficit prediction from lesion and indirect structural and functional
   disconnection. Brain 143, 2173–2188 (2020).
   52.   Talozzi, L. et al. Latent disconnectome prediction of long-term cognitive-behavioural
   symptoms in stroke. Brain 146, 1963–1978 (2023).
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   53.   Thiebaut de Schotten, M., Foulon, C. & Nachev, P. Brain disconnections link structural
   connectivity with function and behaviour. Nat Commun 11, 5094 (2020).
   54.   Corbetta, M. et al. Common Behavioral Clusters and Subcortical Anatomy in Stroke.
   Neuron 85, 927–941 (2015).
   55.     Baldassarre, A., Ramsey, L. E., Siegel, J. S., Shulman, G. L. & Corbetta, M. Brain
   connectivity and neurological disorders after stroke. Current Opinion in Neurology 29, 706–713
   (2016).
   56.   Beebe, J. A. & Lang, C. E. Active Range of Motion Predicts Upper Extremity Function 3
   Months After Stroke. Stroke 40, 1772–1779 (2009).
   57.   Cirillo, C. et al. Post-stroke remodeling processes in animal models and humans. J
   Cereb Blood Flow Metab 40, 3–22 (2020).
   58.    Bisogno, A. L. et al. A low-dimensional structure of neurological impairment in stroke.
   Brain Communications 3, fcab119 (2021).
   59.     Pini, L. et al. A low-dimensional cognitive-network space in Alzheimer’s disease and
   frontotemporal dementia. Alz Res Therapy 14, 199 (2022).
   60.    Cruces, R. R. et al. Micapipe: A pipeline for multimodal neuroimaging and connectome
   analysis. NeuroImage 263, 119612 (2022).
   61.    Vos De Wael, R. et al. BrainSpace: a toolbox for the analysis of macroscale gradients in
   neuroimaging and connectomics datasets. Commun Biol 3, 103 (2020).
   62.     Bayrak, Ş. et al. The impact of ischemic stroke on connectivity gradients. NeuroImage:
   Clinical 24, 101947 (2019).
   63.     Yeo, B. T. et al. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic
   functional connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology 106, 1125–1165 (2011).
   64.     St-Onge, E., Schilling, K. G. & Rheault, F. BundleSeg: A versatile, reliable and
   reproducible     approach    to   white   matter  bundle  segmentation.    Preprint   at
   https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2308.10958 (2023).
   65.    Garyfallidis, E. et al. Dipy, a library for the analysis of diffusion MRI data. Front.
   Neuroinform. 8, (2014).
   66.     Daducci, A. et al. Accelerated Microstructure Imaging via Convex Optimization (AMICO)
   from diffusion MRI data. NeuroImage 105, 32–44 (2015).
   67.    McInnes, L., Healy, J., Saul, N. & Großberger, L. UMAP: Uniform Manifold
   Approximation and Projection. JOSS 3, 861 (2018).
   68.     Pini, L. et al. Functional dynamic network connectivity differentiates biological patterns in
   the Alzheimer’s disease continuum. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.14.24314934
   (2024).
   69.    Schaefer, A. et al. Local-Global Parcellation of the Human Cerebral Cortex from Intrinsic
   Functional Connectivity MRI. Cerebral Cortex 28, 3095–3114 (2018).
   70.    Buckner, R. L., Krienen, F. M., Castellanos, A., Diaz, J. C. & Yeo, B. T. T. The
   organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of
   Neurophysiology 106, 2322–2345 (2011).
   71.   Glasser, M. F. et al. A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature 536,
   171–178 (2016).
   72.   Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Spatial Neglect and Attention Networks. Annu. Rev.
   Neurosci. 34, 569–599 (2011).
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   73.   Margulies, D. S. et al. Situating the default-mode network along a principal gradient of
   macroscale cortical organization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 12574–12579 (2016).
   74.   Paquola, C. et al. Microstructural and functional gradients are increasingly dissociated in
   transmodal cortices. PLoS Biol 17, e3000284 (2019).
   75.     Zarkali, A. et al. Organisational and neuromodulatory underpinnings of structural-
   functional connectivity decoupling in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Commun Biol 4, 86
   (2021).
   76.    Grefkes, C. & Fink, G. R. Reorganization of cerebral networks after stroke: new insights
   from neuroimaging with connectivity approaches. Brain 134, 1264–1276 (2011).
   77.     Lim, D. H., LeDue, J. M., Mohajerani, M. H. & Murphy, T. H. Optogenetic Mapping after
   Stroke Reveals Network-Wide Scaling of Functional Connections and Heterogeneous Recovery
   of the Peri-Infarct. J. Neurosci. 34, 16455–16466 (2014).
   78.    Carmichael, S. T. & Chesselet, M.-F. Synchronous Neuronal Activity Is a Signal for
   Axonal Sprouting after Cortical Lesions in the Adult. J. Neurosci. 22, 6062–6070 (2002).
   79.     Ramsey, L. E. et al. Behavioural clusters and predictors of performance during recovery
   from stroke. Nat Hum Behav 1, 0038 (2017).
   80.     Griffis, J. C. et al. Iowa Brain‐Behavior Modeling Toolkit: An Open‐Source MATLAB Tool
   for Inferential and Predictive Modeling of Imaging‐Behavior and Lesion‐Deficit Relationships.
   Human Brain Mapping 45, e70115 (2024).
   81.     Glasser, M. F. & Van Essen, D. C. Mapping Human Cortical Areas In Vivo Based on
   Myelin Content as Revealed by T1- and T2-Weighted MRI. J. Neurosci. 31, 11597–11616
   (2011).
   82.      Lyden, P. D., Lu, M., Levine, S. R., Brott, T. G. & Broderick, J. A Modified National
   Institutes of Health Stroke Scale for Use in Stroke Clinical Trials: Preliminary Reliability and
   Validity. Stroke 32, 1310–1317 (2001).
   83.    Facchini, S. et al. A common low dimensional structure of cognitive impairment in stroke
   and brain tumors. NeuroImage: Clinical 40, 103518 (2023).
   84.      Sperber, C., Gallucci, L. & Umarova, R. The low dimensionality of post-stroke cognitive
   deficits: it’s the lesion anatomy! Brain awac443 (2022) doi:10.1093/brain/awac443.
   85.     Saenger, V. M. et al. Linking Entropy at Rest with the Underlying Structural Connectivity
   in the Healthy and Lesioned Brain. Cereb Cortex 28, 2948–2958 (2018).
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   Table 1. Whole-cohort of stroke patients and healthy controls (intention-to-treat sample)
                                                  Healthy controls                     Stroke patients                  p-values
   Sociodemographic
   Numerosity (ITT-L at T0)                       33                                   79                               /
   Age                                            57.9 ± 10.9                          60.1 ± 11.5                      0.36
   Education                                      13.8 ± 2.5                           13.3 ± 2.5                       0.37
   Gender (Female)                                19 (58%)                             34 (43%)                         0.23
   Behavioral assessment
   Flanker test                                   104 ± 20                             80 ± 21                          <0.001
   Card sorting test                              116 ± 24                             91 ± 25                          <0.001
   Mesulam total missing
   total missing                                  1.69 ± 2.84                          6.84 ± 14.5                      0.05
   center of cancellation                         -0.0015 ± 0.01                       0.005 ± 0.21                     0.85
   Posner test
   accuracy average                               0.99 ± 0.02                          0.86 ± 0.19                      <0.001
   accuracy visual field                          -0.001 ± 0.04                        0.092 ± 0.3                      0.08
   accuracy validity                              0.006 ± 0.02                         -0.029 ± 0.09                    0.02
   accuracy disengage                             0.003 ± 0.03                         0.01 ± 0.09                      0.64
   reaction time average                          527 ± 109                            743 ± 358                        0.001
   reaction time visual field                     2.47 ± 93                            44 ± 488                         0.63
   reaction time validity                         -8.71 ± 56                           5.08 ± 204                       0.70
   reaction time disengage                        8.76 ± 50                            21.9 ± 195                       0.70
   Fluency test (animal)                          21.3 ± 4.78                          16.9 ± 8.77                      0.007
   Comprehension oral sentence                    36.6 ± 0.68                          35.2 ± 4.2 A                     0.079
   Reading oral sentences                         17.9 ± 3.2                           14.9 ± 6.45                      0.02
   Non word                                       17.88 ± 3.21                         14.92 ± 6.45                     0.017
   Boston score                                   13.6 ± 1.88                          12.3 ± 3.63                      0.07
   Brief Visuospatial Memory Test
   Percent retained                               87.4 ± 22.8                          74.5 ± 31.5                      0.04
   Total Immediate Recall                         42.5 ± 12.9                          28 ± 18.9                        <0.001
   Discrimination Index                           5.54 ± 0.90                          4.55 ± 1.69                      0.002
   Delayed recall                                 45.2 ± 14.8                          29.2 ± 19.9                      <0.001
   Hopkins Verbal Learning Test
   Percent retained                               75.8 ± 24.6                          56.5 ± 35.7                      0.006
   Total Immediate Recall                         43.4 ± 13.2                          28.8 ± 16.2                      <0.001
   Discrimination Index                           10.1 ± 1.45                          7.92 ± 2.96                      <0.001
   Delayed recall                                 38.2 ± 18.2                          24.5 ± 20.2                      0.001
   Digit span forward                             7.79 ± 2.26                          6.25 ± 2.33                      0.003
   Digit span Backward                            6.48 ± 2.00                          5.05 ± 2.57                      0.007
   Walk test
   Time                                           1.21 ± 0.42                          0.52 ± 0.61                      <0.001
   Functional independence                        7±0                                  4.96 ± 2.20                      <0.001
   Combined walk test                             8.88 ± 0.33                          6.03 ± 2.95                      <0.001
   Motricity index
   Left lower extremity                           99 ± 3.32                            86.9 ± 23.5                      0.004
   Right lower extremity                          92.3± 3.07                           86.4 ± 24.8                      0.004
   Action Research Arm
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




   Left grasp                                     18 ± 0                               15.3 ± 6.18                      0.014
   Right grasp                                    18 ± 0                               15.2 ± 5.81                      0.007
   Left grip                                      12 ± 0                               10.1 ± 4.17                      0.010
   Right grip                                     12 ± 0                               10.2 ± 3.87                      0.008
   Left pinch                                     18 ± 0                               14.4 ± 6.71                      0.003
   Right pinch                                    18 ± 0.17                            14.3 ± 6.24                      0.001
   Left gross                                     9±0                                  8.01 ± 2.74                      0.042
   Right gross                                    9±0                                  7.75 ± 2.99                      0.019
   A: missing on more than 25% of the stroke sample
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




                                            Figure 1. Overview of the analysis.
      Lef panels. Panel A: Stroke and age-matched controls underwent diffusion imaging multi-shell. Two
   different analyses were performed: Panels B: whole brain structural connectivity matrices were computed
     by tractography. Next, a diffusion embedding algorithm computed connectivity gradients separately for
                                                                                       63
   intra- and inter-hemispheric connections both at the parcel level and network level . Panels C: the same
        diffusion data were used to compute microstructural models (diffusion tensor imaging and neurite
       orientation dispersion and density imaging). The resulting maps were fed into a factorial analysis to
       measure microstructure of white matter and gray matter of disconnected tracts and contralesional
     regions (homotopic to the lesion). Panels D: Connectivity (gradients) and microstructural patterns were
     compared cross-sectionally (controls vs. stroke), longitudinally (2 weeks vs. 3-month follow-up), and for
                                     linear relationship with behavioral scores.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




                              Figure 2. Brain imaging maps employed in the study.
        Panel a: lesion frequency map projected both at the surface and volume level. Panel b: structural
      disconnection patterns (the first two main components are shown at fiber-level and 3D rendering). All
    analyses were carried out on individually computed disconnection maps. Panel c: intra-hemispheric and
     (left panels) inter-hemispheric (right panels) connectivity gradients from the healthy control population
       (WashU cohort). Panel d: microstructural latent diffusion maps at both volumetric (left panels) and
                        surface (right panels) space (healthy controls of the WashU cohort).
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




                                      Figure 3. Latent factors of cognitive score.
     Panel A: Correlation matrix across all behavioral scores (a full description of the tests is reported in the
       Supplementary Materials). Panel B: differences between stroke at the acute stage (red) and controls
     (blue; visit 1) for the behavioral factorial scores. Significant differences are marked with *. Panel C: The
      five latent factors loadings for each behavioral test included in the analysis in panel B. In dark blue are
                                 highlighted the loadings with values higher than 0.5.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




       Figure 4. Structural connectivity gradients and microstructural factorial latent space.
       Panel A: Main gradient relationships in controls (left) and stroke patients (right) for intra-hemispheric
      connectivity; Panel B: Main gradient relationships in controls (left) and stroke patients (right) for intra-
       hemispheric connectivity. For each hemisphere, the interactions between G1 and G2 are presented.
   Exemplary tracts are reported for the extreme points in the cartesian axis (left, right, up, bottom). Panel C:
   Corpus callosum from the average template of the HCP-842 atlas (Yeh et al., 2018) was superimposed to
        the parcel-gradient values across the whole cohort of healthy controls from the WashU cohort. The
          relationship between interG1 and interG2 describes a spatial shape overlapping with the spatial
    topography of the corpus callosum (showed in partial transparency behind the black dots. The aim of this
   figure is to enhance the interpretability of the inter-hemispheric structural gradients. Abbreviations: DMN -
   default mode network; DAN - dorsal-attention network; SMN - sensorimotor network; LIM - limbic network;
            VIS - visual network; FPN - frontoparietal network; VAN - ventral-attention network. Panel D:
     microstructural factorial analysis results in the WashU controls cohort for the first MRI session; Panel E:
      microstructural factorial analysis results in the WashU controls cohort for the second MRI session. The
     scatterplots (center panels) highlight the spatial correlation between the weights projected at voxel level
     between the two sessions. Panel F: Vis-à-vis comparison between the third latent microstructural factor
   (dwiF3) from the HCP cohort and myelin maps from Glasser et al., (2013). Maps were thresholded to retain
                                  94% of the highest values mapping to the cortex.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




     Figure 5. Cross-sectional and longitudinal structural connectivity gradient organization
                                            in stroke.
   Panel A: intra- and inter-hemispheric connectivity classifications (top panels) and parcel-level one-sample
                                                                                 th
     t-tests (bottom panels) are shown. The classification panels display the n -dimensional gradient space
    projected into a 2D space, grouped by diagnostic labels (red: acute stroke; blue: controls – first session).
    The left plots show the grouping of the real data, while the right panels show the support vector machine
   classification accuracy for the same data distribution (accuracy is reported in the bottom box embedded in
     the plots). Panel B: parcel-wise one-sample t-test highlights parcels with the highest values (dark red),
       indicating greater deviation of stroke data from the control template in terms of gradient divergence.
    Panel C: Longitudinal changes in the PPA-L sample. Each dot represents the gradient divergence value
      at the network level for each individual included in the analysis. Networks are colored according to the
   scheme shown at the bottom, represented on the surface brain. Abbreviations: VIS: visual network; SMN:
       sensorimotor network; VAN: ventral attentional network; DAN: dorsal attentional network; LIM: limbic
                        network; FPN: frontoparietal network; DMN: default mode network.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




         Figure 6. Cross-sectional and longitudinal microstructural latent factors in stroke.
   Panel a: cross-sectional differences in microstructural latent factors between stroke (acute) and controls.
        Each plot represents lesion values for patients (red dots) and the values associated with the lesion
    location in the controls (blue dots). Results are presented for all microstructural factors and two different
        SDC thresholds. Asterisks (*) indicate significant p-values. linear model illustrating the relationship
      between microstructural properties and the dysconnectivity profile of contralesional regions during the
   acute stage. The scatterplot displays observed versus predicted values from the linear model (values are
    coded according. The distribution of R² values from the bootstrap procedure is shown in the subpanel in
      the top-left corner. Panel c: microstructural latent properties within parcels classified as disconnected
     versus not disconnected from the lesion. The procedure was iteratively repeated by randomly selecting
     the least disconnected parcel. Each plot in the panel shows the p-value associated with each iteration.
     Significant p-values are in the bottom region (green), while non-significant p-values are in the top (red)
    zone. The bar plot illustrates the difference in dwiF2 values (y-axis) between the maximally disconnected
     parcel and the iteration-average minimally disconnected parcel for each patient included in the analysis
   (x-axis). Panel D: Longitudinal differences in microstructural latent factors between the acute and chronic
   stages. Significance is reported for both the ITT-L and PPA-L samples. Asterisks (*) indicate significant p-
                          values, while hash marks (#) indicate trends toward significance.
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.11.25327333; this version posted May 15, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
                                    It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .




    Figure 7. Cognitive relationship with structural connectivity patterns and microstructural
                                              factors
    Panel A: Parcel-wise cognitive-gradient correlation at the sub-acute stroke stage. The linear correlation
     between behavioral scores and GD values at the parcel level was computed for each behavioral factor.
   Only parcels surviving p<0.05 FDR correction are shown. Results are reported for both intra- (left panels)
      and inter- (right panels) connectivity gradients. The chronic stage showed marginal significance, and
   results are reported in Supplementary Figures S9. Panel B: Microstructural latent space and behavioral
     deficits at acute and chronic stages. Top panels: linear relationship between behavioral factors and the
    microstructural factors within the region-of-interest considered by the study (disconnectivity maps) at the
                                                 2
    acute stage. Each boxplot represents the r of the linear model predicting behavioral scores by means of
    the latent microstructural values. Bottom panel: the same analysis was repeated at the chronic stage. **
                         marks p-values < 0.01 surviving multiple comparison significance.
