                                        Deep learning with convolutional neural networks
arXiv:1703.05051v5 [cs.LG] 8 Jun 2018




                                               for brain mapping and decoding of
                                         movement-related information from the human
                                                             EEG


                                                         Short title: Convolutional neural networks in EEG analysis

                                            Keywords: Electroencephalography, EEG analysis, machine learning, end-to-end learning,
                                          brain-machine interface (BCI), brain-computer interface (BMI), model interpretability, brain
                                                                                  mapping



                                        Robin Tibor Schirrmeister a,b , Jost Tobias Springenbergc,b , Lukas Dominique Josef Fiederera,b,d ,
                                          Martin Glasstettera,b , Katharina Eggenspergere,b , Michael Tangermannf,b , Frank Huttere,b ,
                                                                    Wolfram Burgardg,b , and Tonio Ball1a,b
                                          a
                                            Intracranial EEG and Brain Imaging lab, Epilepsy Center, Medical Center – University of Freiburg
                                                            b
                                                              BrainLinks-BrainTools Cluster of Excellence, University of Freiburg
                                                          c
                                                            Machine Learning Lab, Computer Science Dept., University of Freiburg
                                                          d
                                                            Neurobiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg
                                        e
                                          Machine Learning for Automated Algorithm Design Lab, Computer Science Dept., University of Freiburg
                                                        f
                                                          Brain State Decoding Lab, Computer Science Dept., University of Freiburg
                                                  g
                                                    Autonomous Intelligent Systems Lab, Computer Science Dept., University of Freiburg



                                                                                      June 11, 2018



                                          1
                                              Corresponding author: tonio.ball@uniklinik-freiburg.de
                                           Abstract

    Deep learning with convolutional neural networks (deep ConvNets) has revolutionized computer
vision through end-to-end learning, i.e. learning from the raw data. Now, there is increasing interest
in using deep ConvNets for end-to-end EEG analysis. However, little is known about many important
aspects of how to design and train ConvNets for end-to-end EEG decoding, and there is still a lack
of techniques to visualize the informative EEG features the ConvNets learn.
    Here, we studied deep ConvNets with a range of different architectures, designed for decoding
imagined or executed movements from raw EEG. Our results show that recent advances from the
machine learning field, including batch normalization and exponential linear units, together with a
cropped training strategy, boosted the deep ConvNets decoding performance, reaching or surpassing
that of the widely-used filter bank common spatial patterns (FBCSP) decoding algorithm. While
FBCSP is designed to use spectral power modulations, the features used by ConvNets are not fixed
a priori. Our novel methods for visualizing the learned features demonstrated that ConvNets indeed
learned to use spectral power modulations in the alpha, beta and high gamma frequencies. These
methods also proved useful as a technique for spatially mapping the learned features, revealing
the topography of the causal contributions of features in different frequency bands to decoding the
movement classes.
    Our study thus shows how to design and train ConvNets to decode movement-related information
from the raw EEG without handcrafted features and highlights the potential of deep ConvNets
combined with advanced visualization techniques for EEG-based brain mapping.
Tonio Ball                                                                     1   INTRODUCTION


1    Introduction
Machine-learning techniques allow to extract information from electroencephalographic (EEG) record-
ings of brain activity and therefore play a crucial role in several important EEG-based research and
application areas. For example, machine-learning techniques are a central component of many EEG-
based brain-computer interface (BCI) systems for clinical applications. Such systems already allowed,
for example, persons with severe paralysis to communicate (Nijboer et al., 2008), to draw pictures
(Münßinger et al., 2010), and to control telepresence robots (Tonin et al., 2011). Such systems may
also facilitate stroke rehabilitation (Ramos-Murguialday et al., 2013) and may be used in the treat-
ment of epilepsy (Gadhoumi et al., 2016) (for more examples of potential clinical applications, see
Moghimi et al. (2013)). Furthermore, machine-learning techniques for the analysis of brain signals,
including the EEG, are increasingly recognized as novel tools for neuroscientific inquiry (Das et al.,
2010; Knops et al., 2009; Kurth-Nelson et al., 2016; Stansbury et al., 2013).
    However, despite many examples of impressive progress, there is still room for considerable
improvement with respect to the accuracy of information extraction from the EEG and hence, an
interest in transferring advances from the area of machine learning to the field of EEG decoding
and BCI. A recent, prominent example of such an advance in machine learning is the application of
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets), particularly in computer vision tasks. Thus, first studies
have started to investigate the potential of ConvNets for brain-signal decoding ((Antoniades et al.,
2016; Bashivan et al., 2016; Cecotti and Graser, 2011; Hajinoroozi et al., 2016; Lawhern et al., 2016;
Liang et al., 2016; Manor et al., 2016; Manor and Geva, 2015; Page et al., 2016; Ren and Wu, 2014;
Sakhavi et al., 2015; Shamwell et al., 2016; Stober, 2016; Stober et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2016; Tabar
and Halici, 2017; Tang et al., 2017; Thodoroff et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2013), see Supplementary
Section A.1 for more details on these studies). Still, several important methodological questions on
EEG analysis with ConvNets remain, as detailed below and addressed in the present study.
    ConvNets are artificial neural networks that can learn local patterns in data by using convolutions
as their key component (also see Section 2.3). ConvNets vary in the number of convolutional layers,
ranging from shallow architectures with just one convolutional layer such as in a successful speech
recognition ConvNet (Abdel-Hamid et al., 2014) over deep ConvNets with multiple consecutive
convolutional layers (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to very deep architectures with more than 1000 layers
as in the case of the recently developed residual networks (He et al., 2015). Deep ConvNets can
first extract local, low-level features from the raw input and then increasingly more global and high
level features in deeper layers. For example, deep ConvNets can learn to detect increasingly complex
visual features (e.g., edges, simple shapes, complete objects) from raw images. Over the past years,
deep ConvNets have become highly successful in many application areas, such as in computer vision
and speech recognition, often outperforming previous state-of-the-art methods (we refer to LeCun
et al. (2015) and Schmidhuber (2015) for recent reviews). For example, deep ConvNets reduced the
error rates on the ImageNet image-recognition challenge, where 1.2 million images must be classified
into 1000 different classes, from above 26% to below 4% within 4 years (He et al., 2015; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012). ConvNets also reduced error rates in recognizing speech, e.g., from English news
broadcasts (Sainath et al., 2015a; Sercu et al., 2016); however, in this field, hybrid models combining
ConvNets with other machine-learning components, notably recurrent networks, and deep neural
networks without convolutions are also competitive (Li and Wu, 2015; Sainath et al., 2015b; Sak
et al., 2015). Deep ConvNets also contributed to the spectacular success of AlphaGo, an artificial
intelligence that beat the world champion in the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016).
    An attractive property of ConvNets that was leveraged in many previous applications is that


                                                  1
Tonio Ball                                                                      1   INTRODUCTION


they are well suited for end-to-end learning, i.e., learning from the raw data without any a priori
feature selection. End-to-end learning might be especially attractive in brain-signal decoding, as
not all relevant features can be assumed to be known a priori. Hence, in the present study we have
investigated how ConvNets of different architectures and designs can be used for end-to-end learning
of EEG recorded in human subjects.
    The EEG signal has characteristics that make it different from inputs that ConvNets have been
most successful on, namely images. In contrast to two-dimensional static images, the EEG signal is
a dynamic time series from electrode measurements obtained on the three-dimensional scalp surface.
Also, the EEG signal has a comparatively low signal-to-noise ratio, i.e., sources that have no task-
relevant information often affect the EEG signal more strongly than the task-relevant sources. These
properties could make learning features in an end-to-end fashion fundamentally more difficult for
EEG signals than for images. Thus, the existing ConvNets architectures from the field of computer
vision need to be adapted for EEG input and the resulting decoding accuracies rigorously evaluated
against more traditional feature extraction methods. For that purpose, a well-defined baseline is
crucial, i.e., a comparison against an implementation of a standard EEG decoding method validated
on published results for that method. In light of this, in the present study we addressed two key
questions:
   • What is the impact of ConvNet design choices (e.g., the overall network architecture or other
     design choices such as the type of non-linearity used) on the decoding accuracies?
   • What is the impact of ConvNet training strategies (e.g., training on entire trials or crops within
     trials) on decoding accuracies?
    To address these questions, we created three ConvNets with different architectures, with the num-
ber of convolutional layers ranging from 2 layers in a “shallow” ConvNet over a 5-layer deep ConvNet
up to a 31-layer residual network (ResNet). Additionally, we also created a hybrid ConvNet from
the deep and shallow ConvNets. As described in detail in the methods section, these architectures
were inspired both from existing “non-ConvNet” EEG decoding methods, which we embedded in a
ConvNet, as well as from previously published successful ConvNet solutions in the image processing
domain (for example, the ResNet architecture recently won several image recognition competitions
(He et al., 2015). All architectures were adapted to the specific requirements imposed by the analysis
of multi-channel EEG data. To address whether these ConvNets can reach competitive decoding
accuracies, we performed a statistical comparison of their decoding accuracies to those achieved
with decoding based on filter bank common spatial patterns (FBCSP, Ang et al. (2008); Chin et al.
(2009)), a method that is widely used in EEG decoding and has won several EEG decoding compe-
titions such as BCI Competition IV 2a and 2b. We analyzed the offline decoding performance on
two suitable motor decoding EEG datasets (see Section 2.7 for details). In all cases, we used only
minimal preprocessing to conduct a fair end-to-end comparison of ConvNets and FBCSP.
    In addition to the role of the overall network architecture, we systematically evaluated a range
of important design choices. We focussed on alternatives resulting from recent advances in machine-
learning research on deep ConvNets. Thus, we evaluated potential performance improvements by
using dropout as a novel regularization strategy (Srivastava et al., 2014), intermediate normalization
by batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) or exponential linear units as a recently proposed
activation function (Clevert et al., 2016). A comparable analysis of the role of deep ConvNet design
choices in EEG decoding is currently lacking.
    In addition to the global architecture and specific design choices which together define the “struc-
ture” of ConvNets, another important topic that we address is how a given ConvNet should be trained


                                                   2
Tonio Ball                                                                     1   INTRODUCTION


on the data. As with architecture and design, there are several different methodological options and
choices with respect to the training process, such as the optimization algorithm (e.g., Adam (Kingma
and Ba, 2014), Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011), etc.), or the sampling of the training data. Here, we
focused on the latter question of sampling the training data as there is usually, compared to current
computer vision tasks with millions of samples, relatively little data available for EEG decoding.
Therefore, we evaluated two sampling strategies, both for the deep and shallow ConvNets: training
on whole trials or on multiple crops of the trial, i.e., on windows shifted through the trials. Using
multiple crops holds promise as it increases the amount of training examples, which has been crucial
to the success of deep ConvNets. Using multiple crops has become standard procedure for ConvNets
for image recognition (see (He et al., 2015; Howard, 2013; Szegedy et al., 2015), but the usefulness
of cropped training has not yet been examined in EEG decoding.
    In addition to the problem of achieving good decoding accuracies, a growing corpus of research
tackles the problem of understanding what ConvNets learn (see Yeager (2016) for a recent overview).
This direction of research may be especially relevant for neuroscientists interested in using ConvNets
— insofar as they want to understand what features in the brain signal discriminate the investigated
classes. Here we present two novel methods for feature visualization that we used to gain insights
into our ConvNet learned from the neuronal data.
    We concentrated on EEG band power features as a target for visualizations. Based on a
large body of literature on movement-related spectral power modulations (Chatrian et al., 1959;
Pfurtscheller and Aranibar, 1977, 1978; Pfurtscheller and Berghold, 1989; Pfurtscheller et al., 1994;
Toro et al., 1994), we had clear expectations which band power features should be discriminative for
the different classes; thus our rationale was that visualizations of these band power features would
be particularly useful to verify that the ConvNets are using actual brain signals. Also, since FBCSP
uses these features too, they allowed us to directly compare visualizations for both approaches. Our
first method can be used to show how much information about a specific feature is retained in the
ConvNet in different layers, however it does not evaluate whether the feature causally affects the
ConvNet outputs. Therefore, we designed our second method to directly investigate causal effects of
the feature values on the ConvNet outputs. With both visualization methods, it is possible to derive
topographic scalp maps that either show how much information about the band power in different
frequency bands is retained in the outputs of the trained ConvNet or how much they causally affect
the outputs of the trained ConvNet.
    Addressing the questions raised above, in summary the main contributions of this study are as
follows:

   • We show for the first time that end-to-end deep ConvNets can reach accuracies at least in the
     same range as FBCSP for decoding movement-related information from EEG.
   • We evaluate a large number of ConvNet design choices on an EEG decoding task, and we show
     that recently developed methods from the field of deep learning such as batch normalization
     and exponential linear units are crucial for reaching high decoding accuracies.
   • We show that cropped training can increase the decoding accuracy of deep ConvNets and
     describe a computationally efficient training strategy to train ConvNets on a larger number of
     input crops per EEG trial.
   • We develop and apply novel visualizations that highly suggest that the deep ConvNets learn
     to use the band power in frequency bands relevant for motor decoding (alpha, beta, gamma)
     with meaningful spatial distributions.


                                                  3
Tonio Ball                                                                   1   INTRODUCTION


    Thus, in summary, the methods and findings described in this study pave the way for a widespread
application of deep ConvNets for EEG decoding both in clinical applications and neuroscientific
research.




                                                 4
Tonio Ball                                                                                 2   METHODS


2       Methods
We first provide basic definitions with respect to brain-signal decoding as a supervised classification
problem used in the remaining Methods section. This is followed by the principles of both filter bank
common spatial patterns (FBCSP), the established baseline decoding method referred to throughout
the present study, and of convolutional neural networks (ConvNets). Next, we describe the ConvNets
developed for this study in detail, including the design choices we evaluated. Afterwards, the
training of the ConvNets, including two training strategies, are described. Then we present two
novel visualizations of trained ConvNets in Section 2.6. Datasets and preprocessing descriptions
follow in Section 2.7. Details about statistical evaluation, software and hardware can be found in
Supplementary Sections A.8 and A.9.

2.1     Definitions and notation
This section more formally defines how brain-signal decoding can be viewed as a supervised classi-
fication problem and includes the notation used to describe the methods.

2.1.1    Input and labels
We assume that we are given one EEG data set per subject i. Each dataset is separated into labeled
trials (time-segments of the original recording that each belong to one of several classes). Concretely,
we are given datasets Di = {(X 1 , y 1 ), ..., (X Ni , y Ni )} where Ni denotes the total number of recorded
trials for subject i. The input matrix X j ∈ RE·T of trial j, 1 ≤ j ≤ Ni contains the preprocessed
signals of E recorded electrodes and T discretized time steps recorded per trial.
    The corresponding class label of trial j is denoted by y j . It takes values from a set of K class
labels L that, in our case, correspond to the imagined or executed movements performed in each
trial, e.g.: ∀y j : y j ∈ L = {l1 = “Hand (Left)”, l2 = “Hand (Right)”, l3 = “Feet”, l4 = “Rest”}.

2.1.2    Decoder
The decoder f is trained on these existing trials such that it is able to assign the correct label to
new unseen trials. Concretely, we aim to train the decoder to assign the label y j to trial X j using
the output of a parametric classifier f (X j ; θ) : RE·T → L with parameters θ.
    For the rest of this manuscript we assume that the classifier f (X j ; θ) is represented by a standard
machine-learning pipeline decomposed into two parts: A first part that extracts a (vector-valued)
feature representation φ(X j ; θφ ) with parameters θφ — which could either be set manually (for
hand designed features), or learned from the data; and a second part consisting of a classifier g with
parameters θg that is trained using these features, i.e., f (X j ; θ) = g φ(X j ; θφ ), θg .
    As described in detail in the following sections, it is important to note that FBCSP and ConvNets
differ in how they implement this framework: in short, FBCSP has separated feature extraction and
classifier stages, while ConvNets learn both stages jointly.

2.2     Filter bank common spatial patterns (FBCSP)
FBCSP (Ang et al., 2008; Chin et al., 2009) is a widely-used method to decode oscillatory EEG data,
for example, with respect to movement-related information, i.e., the decoding problem we focus on
in this study. FBCSP was the best-performing method for the BCI competition IV dataset 2a, which


                                                     5
Tonio Ball                                                                             2   METHODS


we use in the present study (in the following called BCI Competition Dataset, see Section 2.7 for a
short dataset description). FBCSP also won other similar EEG decoding competitions (Tangermann
et al., 2012). Therefore, we consider FBCSP an adequate benchmark algorithm for the evaluation
of the performance of ConvNets in the present study.
    In the following, we explain the computational steps of FBCSP. We will refer to these steps when
explaining our shallow ConvNet architecture (see Section 2.4.3), as it is inspired by these steps.
    In a supervised manner, FBCSP computes spatial filters (linear combinations of EEG channels)
that enhance class-discriminative band power features contained in the EEG. FBCSP extracts and
uses these features φ(X j ; θφ ) (which correspond to the feature representation part in Section 2.1.2)
to decode the label of a trial in several steps (we will refer back to these steps when we explain the
shallow ConvNet):

  1. Bandpass filtering: Different bandpass filters are applied to separate the raw EEG signal
     into different frequency bands.

  2. Epoching: The continuous EEG signal is cut into trials as explained in Section 2.1.1.
  3. CSP computation: Per frequency band, the common spatial patterns (CSP) algorithm
     is applied to extract spatial filters. CSP aims to extract spatial filters that make the trials
     discriminable by the power of the spatially filtered trial signal (see Koles et al. (1990); Ramoser
     et al. (2000); Blankertz et al. (2008) for more details on the computation). The spatial filters
     correspond to the learned parameters θφ in FBCSP.
  4. Spatial filtering: The spatial filters computed in Step 2 are applied to the EEG signal.
  5. Feature construction: Feature vectors φ(X j ; θφ ) are constructed from the filtered signals:
     Specifically, feature vectors are the log-variance of the spatially filtered trial signal for each
     frequency band and for each spatial filter.

  6. Classification: A classifier is trained to predict per-trial labels based on the feature vectors.

   For details on our FBCSP implementation, see Supplementary Section A.2.

2.3     Convolutional neural networks
In the following sections, we first explain the basic ideas of ConvNets. We then describe architec-
tural choices for ConvNets on EEG, including how to represent the EEG input for a ConvNet, the
three different ConvNet architectures used in this study and several specific design choices that we
evaluated for these architectures. Finally, we describe how to train the ConvNets, including the
description of a trial-wise and a cropped training strategy for our EEG data.

2.3.1   Basics
Generally, ConvNets combine two ideas useful for many learning tasks on natural signals, such as
images and audio signals. These signals often have an inherent hierarchical structure (e.g., images
typically consist of edges that together form simple shapes which again form larger, more complex
shapes and so on). ConvNets can learn local non-linear features (through convolutions and nonlin-
earities) and represent higher-level features as compositions of lower level features (through multiple



                                                  6
Tonio Ball                                                                                2   METHODS


layers of processing). In addition, many ConvNets use pooling layers which create a coarser inter-
mediate feature representation and can make the ConvNet more translation-invariant. For further
details see LeCun et al. (2015); Goodfellow et al. (2016); Schmidhuber (2015).

2.4     ConvNet architectures and design choices
2.4.1   Input representation
The first important decision for applying ConvNets to EEG decoding is how to represent the input
X j ∈ RE·T . One possibility would be to represent the EEG as a time series of topographically
organized images, i.e., of the voltage distributions across the (flattened) scalp surface (this has been
done for ConvNets that get power spectra as input (Bashivan et al., 2016). However, EEG signals
are assumed to approximate a linear superposition of spatially global voltage patterns caused by
multiple dipolar current sources in the brain (Nunez and Srinivasan, 2006). Unmixing of these
global patterns using a number of spatial filters is therefore typically applied to the whole set of
relevant electrodes as a basic step in many successful examples of EEG decoding (Ang et al., 2008;
Blankertz et al., 2008; Rivet et al., 2009).
     In this view, all relevant EEG modulations are global in nature, due to the physical origin of
the non-invasive EEG and hence there would be no obvious hierarchical compositionality of local
and global EEG modulations in space. In contrast, there is an abundance of evidence that the EEG
is organized across multiple time scales, such as in nested oscillations (Canolty et al., 2006; Monto
et al., 2008; Schack et al., 2002; Vanhatalo et al., 2004) involving both local and global modulations
in time. In light of this, we designed ConvNets in a way that they can learn spatially global unmixing
filters in the entrance layers, as well as temporal hierarchies of local and global modulations in the
deeper architectures. To this end we represent the input as a 2D-array with the number of time steps
as the width and the number of electrodes as the height. This approach also significantly reduced
the input dimensionality compared with the “EEG-as-an-image” approach.

2.4.2   Deep ConvNet for raw EEG signals
To tackle the task of EEG decoding we designed a deep ConvNet architecture inspired by successful
architectures in computer vision, as for example described in Krizhevsky et al. (2012). The require-
ments for this architecture are as follows: We want a model that is able to extract a wide range of
features and is not restricted to specific feature types (Hertel et al., 2015). We were interested in
such a generic architecture for two reasons: 1) we aimed to uncover whether such a generic ConvNet
designed only with minor expert knowledge can reach competitive accuracies, and, 2) to lend support
to the idea that standard ConvNets can be used as a general-purpose tool for brain-signal decoding
tasks. As an aside, keeping the architecture generic also increases the chances that ConvNets for
brain decoding can directly profit from future methodological advances in deep learning.
     Our deep ConvNet had four convolution-max-pooling blocks, with a special first block designed
to handle EEG input (see below), followed by three standard convolution-max-pooling blocks and
a dense softmax classification layer (see Figure 1). The first convolutional block was split into two
convolutional layers in order to better handle the large number of input channels — one input channel
per electrode compared to three input channels (one per color) in rgb-images. The convolution was
split into a first convolution across time and a second convolution across space (electrodes); each
filter in these steps has weights for all electrodes (like a CSP spatial filter) and for the filters of the
preceding temporal convolution (like any standard intermediate convolutional layer). Since there is


                                                    7
Tonio Ball                                                                                                                      2   METHODS




         Conv­Pool Block 1
                                       Convolution
                                        (temporal)             44
                                      25 Linear Units                                             10
                                                                                                              1
                                                                    534
                                        Convolution                                                    25
                                      (all electrodes)
                                                               44
                                25 Exponential Linear Units
                                                                                                          44
                                                               25
                                                                     510
                                       Max Pooling                                                 3
                                                               25                                             1
                                         Stride 3x1
                                                                     510
                                                                                                  10
         Conv­Pool Block 2




                                       Convolution                                                                25
                                50 Exponential Linear Units                    25
                                                                                     171
                                       Max Pooling                                                    3
                                                                                50                            1
                                         Stride 3x1
                                                                                     162
                                                                                                  10
         Conv­Pool Block 3




                                       Convolution
                                100 Exponential Linear Units                         50                       50
                                                                                            54
                                       Max Pooling                                                    3
                                         Stride 3x1                                  100                      1
                                                                                            45
                                                                                                  10
         Conv­Pool Block 4




                                       Convolution
                                200 Exponential Linear Units                          100                     100
                                                                                             15
                                       Max Pooling                                            3
                                         Stride 3x1                                    200            1
                                                                                                  6
                                   Linear Classification
         Classification Layer




                                      (Dense Layer)
                                      4 Softmax Units                                       200

                                                                                                          2
                                                                          Hand (L)   Hand (R)                     Feet   Rest



Figure 1: Deep ConvNet architecture. EEG input (at the top) is progressively transformed
towards the bottom, until the final classifier output. Black cuboids: inputs/feature maps; brown
cuboids: convolution/pooling kernels. The corresponding sizes are indicated in black and brown,
respectively. Note that in this schematics, proportions of maps and kernels are only approximate.


                                                                           8
Tonio Ball                                                                             2   METHODS


                           Convolution
                            (temporal)            44           25
                             40 Units                                1
                                                       534
                            Convolution                            40
                          (all electrodes)        44
                             40 Units                               44
                                                  40
                                                       510
                                                             Square
                                                               75
                          Mean Pooling            40                    1
                            Stride 15x1                510
                                                               Log
                                                               30
                       Linear Classification                            40
                      (Dense Layer+Softmax)
                              4 Units

                                               Hand (L) Hand (R)        Feet   Rest

             Figure 2: Shallow ConvNet architecture. Conventions as in Figure 1.


no activation function in between the two convolutions, they could in principle be combined into one
layer. Using two layers however implicitly regularizes the overall convolution by forcing a separation
of the linear transformation into a combination of two (temporal and spatial) convolutions. This
splitted convolution was evaluated against a single-step convolution in our experiments (see Section
2.4.4).
    We used exponential linear units (ELUs, f (x) = x for x > 0 and f (x) = ex − 1 for x <= 0
(Clevert et al., 2016)) as activation functions (we also evaluated Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs,
f (x) = max(x, 0)), as a less recently proposed alternative, see Section 2.4.4).

2.4.3   Shallow ConvNet for raw EEG signals
We also designed a more shallow architecture referred to as shallow ConvNet, inspired by the FBCSP
pipeline (see Figure 2), specifically tailored to decode band power features. The transformations
performed by the shallow ConvNet are similar to the transformations of FBCSP (see Section 2.2).
Concretely, the first two layers of the shallow ConvNet perform a temporal and a spatial convolution,
as in the deep ConvNet. These steps are analogous to the bandpass and CSP spatial filter steps in
FBCSP. In contrast to the deep ConvNet, the temporal convolution of the shallow ConvNet had a
larger kernel size (25 vs 10), allowing a larger range of transformations in this layer (smaller kernel
sizes for the shallow ConvNet led to lower accuracies in preliminary experiments). After the two
convolutions of the shallow ConvNet, a squaring nonlinearity, a mean pooling layer and a logarithmic
activation function followed; together these steps are analogous to the trial log-variance computation
in FBCSP (we note that these steps were not used in the deep ConvNet). In contrast to FBCSP, the


                                                   9
Tonio Ball                                                                                         2   METHODS


shallow ConvNet embeds all the computational steps in a single network, and thus all steps can be
optimized jointly (see Section 2.5). Also, due to having several pooling regions within one trial, the
shallow ConvNet can learn a temporal structure of the band power changes within the trial, which
was shown to help classification in prior work (Sakhavi et al., 2015).

2.4.4   Design choices for deep and shallow ConvNet
For both architectures described above we evaluated several design choices. We evaluated architec-
tural choices which we expect to have a potentially large impact on the decoding accuracies and/or
from which we hoped to gain insights into the behavior of the ConvNets. Thus, for the deep ConvNet,
we compared the design aspects listed in Table 1.

 Design         as-   Our choice           Variants              Motivation
 pect
 Activation           ELU                  square, ReLU          We expected these choices to be sensitive to the
 functions                                                       type of feature (e.g., signal phase or power), since
 Pooling mode         max                  mean                  squaring and mean pooling results in mean power
                                                                 (given a zero-mean signal). Different features may
                                                                 play different roles in the low-frequency components
                                                                 vs. the higher frequencies (see Section 2.7).

 Regularization       Dropout + batch      Only batch nor-       We wanted to investigate whether recent deep learn-
 and intermediate     normalization +      malization, only      ing advances improve accuracies and check how much
 normalization        a new tied loss      dropout, neither      regularization is required.
                      function (expla-     of both, no tied
                      nations see text)    loss
 Factorized tem-      One 10x1 convo-      Two 6x1 convolu-      Factorized convolutions are used by other successful
 poral    convolu-    lution per convo-    tions per convolu-    ConvNets (see Szegedy et al. (2015))
 tions                lutional layer       tional layer
 Splitted vs one-     Splitted convo-      one-step convolu-     Factorizing convolution into spatial and temporal
 step convolution     lution in first      tion in first layer   parts may improve accuracies for the large number of
                      layer (see Section                         EEG input channels (compared with three rgb color
                      2.4.2)                                     channels of regular image datasets).


Table 1: Evaluated design choices. Design choices we evaluated for our convolutional networks.
“Our choice” are the choices we used when evaluating ConvNets in the remainder of this manuscript,
e.g., vs FBCSP. Note that these design choices have not been evaluated in prior work, see Supple-
mentary Section A.1

    In the following, we give additional details for some of these aspects. Batch normalization
standardizes intermediate outputs of the network to zero mean and unit variance for a batch of
training examples (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015). This is meant to facilitate the optimization by keeping
the inputs of layers closer to a normal distribution during training. We applied batch normalization,
as recommended in the original paper (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015), to the output of convolutional
layers before the nonlinearity. Dropout randomly sets some inputs for a layer to zero in each
training update. It is meant to prevent co-adaption of different units and can be seen as analogous
to training an ensemble of networks. We drop out the inputs to all convolutional layers after the
first with a probability of 0.5. Finally, our new tied loss function is designed to further regularize
our cropped training (see Section 2.5.4 for an explanation).



                                                          10
Tonio Ball                                                                              2   METHODS


   We evaluated the same design aspects for the shallow ConvNet, except for the following differ-
ences:

   • The baseline methods for the activation function and pooling mode were chosen as “squaring
     nonlinearity” and “mean pooling”, motivation is given in Section 2.4.3.
   • We did not include factorized temporal convolutions into the comparison, as the longer ker-
     nel lengths of the shallow ConvNet make these convolutions less similar to other successful
     ConvNets anyways.

   • We additionally compared the logarithmic nonlinearity after the pooling layer with a square
     root nonlinearity to check if the logarithmic activation inspired by FBCSP is better than
     traditional L2-pooling.

2.4.5   Hybrid ConvNet
Besides the individual design choices for the deep and shallow ConvNet, a natural question to ask is
whether both ConvNets can be combined into a single ConvNet. Such a hybrid ConvNet could profit
from the more specific feature extraction of the shallow ConvNet as well as from the more generic
feature extraction of the deep ConvNet. Therefore, we also created a hybrid ConvNet by fusing both
networks after the final layer. Concretely, we replaced the four-filter softmax classification layers of
both ConvNets by 60- and 40-filter ELU layers for the deep and shallow ConvNet respectively. The
resulting 100 feature maps were concatenated and used as the input to a new softmax classification
layer. We retrained the whole hybrid ConvNet from scratch and did not use any pretrained deep or
shallow ConvNet parameters.

2.4.6   Residual ConvNet for raw EEG signals
In addition to the shallow and deep ConvNets, we evaluated another network architecture: Residual
networks (ResNets), a ConvNet architecture that recently won several benchmarks in the computer
vision field (He et al., 2015). ResNets typically have a very large number of layers and we wanted
to investigate whether similar networks with more layers also result in good performance in EEG
decoding. ResNets add the input of a convolutional layer to the output of the same layer, to the
effect that the convolutional layer only has to learn to output a residual that changes the previous
layers output (hence the name residual network). This allows ResNets to be successfully trained
with a much larger number of layers than traditional convolutional networks (He et al., 2015). Our
residual blocks are the same as described in the original paper (see Figure 3).
    Our ResNet used exponential linear unit activation functions (Clevert et al., 2016) throughout the
network (same as the deep ConvNet) and also starts with a splitted temporal and spatial convolution
(same as the deep and shallow ConvNets), followed by 14 residual blocks, mean pooling and a final
softmax dense classification layer (for further details, see Supplementary Section A.3).

2.5     ConvNet training
In this section, we first give a definition of how ConvNets are trained in general. Second, we describe
two ways of extracting training inputs and training labels from the EEG data, which result in a
trialwise and a cropped training strategy.



                                                  11
Tonio Ball                                                                                      2   METHODS



            x                                  F(x)                                   F(x) + x

                                                                                      L
          input        convolution   batch norm           convolution    batch norm             output
                                                    elu                                   elu


                                              identity

Figure 3: Residual Block. Residual block used in the ResNet architecture and as described in
original paper (He et al., 2015), see Figure 2) with identity shortcut option A, except using ELU
instead of ReLU nonlinearities. See Section 2.4.6 for explanation.


2.5.1     Definition
To train a ConvNet, all parameters (all weights and biases) of the ConvNet are trained jointly.
Formally, in our supervised classification setting, the ConvNet computes a function from input data
to one real number per class, f (X j ; θ) : RE·T → RK , where θ are the parameters of the function, E
the number of electrodes, T the number of timesteps and K the number of possible output labels.
To use ConvNets for classification, the output is typically transformed to conditional probabilities
                                                                                                j
of a label lk given the input X j using the softmax function: p(lk |f (X j ; θ)) = PKexp(f k (X ;θ))
                                                                                         exp(f     j     .
                                                                                     k=1       k (X ;θ))
In our case, since we train per subject, the softmax output gives us a subject-specific conditional
distribution over the K classes. Now we can train the entire ConvNet to assign high probabilities
to the correct labels by minimizing the sum of the per-example losses:
                                              N
                                              X                                 
                                 ∗
                                θ = arg min         loss y j , p lk |fk (X j ; θ)                        (1)
                                          θ
                                              j=1

, where

                                               X
                                                  K                       
                  loss y j , p lk |fk (X j ; θ) =   −log p lk |fk (X j ; θ) · δ(y j = lk )               (2)
                                                  k=1

is the negative log likelihood of the labels. As is common for training ConvNets, the parameters
are optimized via mini-batch stochastic gradient descent using analytical gradients computed via
backpropagation (see LeCun et al. (2015) for an explanation in the context of ConvNets and Section
2.5.5 in this manuscript for details on the optimizer used in this study).
    This ConvNet training description is connected to our general EEG decoding definitions from
Section 2.1 as follows. The function that the ConvNet computes can be viewed as consisting of a
feature extraction function and a classifier function: The feature extraction function φ(X j ; θφ ) with
parameters θφ is computed by all layers up to the penultimate layer. The classification function
g φ(X j ; θφ ), θg with parameters θg , which uses the output of the feature extraction function as
input, is computed by the final classification layer. In this view, one key advantage of ConvNets
becomes clear: With the joint optimization of both functions, a ConvNet learns both, a descriptive
feature representation for the task as well as a discriminative classifier. This is especially useful with
large datasets, where it is more likely that the ConvNet learns to extract useful features and does


                                                          12
Tonio Ball                                                                              2   METHODS


not just overfit to noise patterns. For EEG data, learning features can be especially valuable since
there may be unknown discriminative features or at least discriminative features that are not used
by more traditional feature extraction methods such as FBCSP.

2.5.2   Input and labels
In this study, we evaluated two ways of defining the input examples and target labels that the
ConvNet is trained on. First, a trial-wise strategy that uses whole trials as input and per-trial labels
as targets. Second, a cropped training strategy that uses crops, i.e., sliding time windows within the
trial as input and per-crop labels as targets (where the label of a crop is identical to the label of the
trial the crop was extracted from).

2.5.3   Trial-wise training
The standard trial-wise training strategy uses the whole duration of the trial and is therefore similar
to how FBCSP is trained. For each trial, the trial signal is used as input and the corresponding
trial label as target to train the ConvNet. In our study, for both datasets we had 4.5-second
trials (from 500 ms before trial start cue until trial end cue, as that worked best in preliminary
experiments) as the input to the network. This led to 288 training examples per subject for the BCI
Competition Dataset and about 880 training examples per subject on the High-Gamma Dataset
after their respective train-test split.

2.5.4   Cropped training
The cropped training strategy uses crops, i.e., sliding input windows within the trial, which leads to
many more training examples for the network than the trial-wise training strategy. We adapted this
strategy from convolutional neural networks for object recognition in images, where using multiple
crops of the input image is a standard procedure to increase decoding accuracy (see for example He
et al. (2015) and Szegedy et al. (2015)).
    In our study, we used crops of about 2 seconds as the input. We adopt a cropping approach,
which leads to the largest possible number of crops by creating one crop per sample (by sample, we
mean a timestep in our EEG trial time series). More formally, given an original trial X j ∈ RE·T
with E electrodes and T timesteps, we create a set of crops with crop size T 0 as timeslices of the
                 j
trial: C j = {X1..E,t..t+T |t ∈ 1..T − T 0 }. All of these T − T 0 crops are new training data examples
for our decoder and will get the same label y j as the original trial.
    This aggressive cropping has the aim to force the ConvNet into using features that are present
in all crops of the trial, since the ConvNet can no longer use the differences between crops and the
global temporal structure of the features in the complete trial. We collected crops starting from
0.5 seconds before trial start (first crop from 0.5 seconds before to 1.5 seconds after trial start),
with the last crop ending 4 seconds after the trial start (which coincides with the trial end, so the
last crop starts 2 seconds before the trial and continues to the trial end). Overall, this resulted in
625 crops and therefore 625 label predictions per trial. The mean of these 625 predictions is used
as the final prediction for the trial during the test phase. During training, we compute a loss for
each prediction. Therefore, cropped training increases our training set size by a factor of 625, albeit
with highly correlated training examples. Since our crops are smaller than the trials, the ConvNet
input size is also smaller (from about 1000 input samples to about 500 input samples for the 250 Hz
sampling rate), while all other hyperparameters stay the same.


                                                   13
Tonio Ball                                                                                           2   METHODS


Input                                              1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Split Crops
                     1 2 3 4 5                           2 3 4 5 6                           3 4 5 6 7
Convolution
(Size 2)
                       3 5 7 9                              5 7 9 11                            7 9 11 13
Convolution
(Size 2, Stride 2)
                             8 16                                12 20                                16 24
Dense Linear Projection
                               24                                   32                                   40
(a) Naı̈ve implementation by first splitting the trial into crops and passing the crops through the ConvNet indepen-
dently.


                              Input                1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                              Convolution
                              (Size 2)
                                                      3 5 7 9 11 13
                              Convolution
                              (Size 2)
                                                         8 12 16 20 24
                              Split Stride Offsets
                              (Stride 2)
                                                                8 16 24
                                                               12 20 NaN
                              Convolution
                              (Size 2)
                                                                 24 40
                                                                 32 NaN
                              Interleave
                                                               24 32 40
(b) Optimized implementation, computing the outputs for each crop in a single forward pass. Strides in the original
ConvNet are handled by separating intermediate results that correspond to different stride offsets, see the split stride
offsets step. NaNs are only needed to pad all intermediate outputs to the same size and are removed in the end. The
split stride step can simply be repeated in case of further layers with stride. We interleave the outputs only after the
final predictions, also in the case of ConvNets with more layers.

Figure 4: Multiple-crop prediction used for cropped training. In this toy example, a trial with
the sample values 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 is cut into three crops of length 5 and these crops are passed through
a convolutional network with two convolutional layers and one dense layer. The convolutional layers
both have kernel size 2, the second one additionally uses a stride of 2. Filters for both layers and the
final dense layer have values 1,1. Red indicates intermediate outputs that were computed multiple
times in the naı̈ve implementation. Note that both implementations result in the same final outputs.


                                                          14
Tonio Ball                                                                                            2   METHODS


    To reduce the computational load from the increased training set size, we decoded a group of
neighboring crops together and reused intermediate convolution outputs. This idea has been used
in the same way to speed up ConvNets that make predictions for each pixel in an image (Giusti
et al., 2013; Nasse et al., 2009; Sermanet et al., 2014; Shelhamer et al., 2016). In a nutshell, this
method works by providing the ConvNet with an input that contains several crops and computing
the predictions for all crops in a single forward pass (see Figure 4 for an explanation). This cropped
training method leads to a new hyperparameter: the number of crops that are processed at the same
time. The larger this number of crops, the larger the speedup one can get (upper bounded by the
size of one crop, see Giusti et al. (2013) for a more detailed speedup analysis on images), at the
cost of increased memory consumption. A larger number of crops that are processed at the same
time during training also implies parameter updates from gradients computed on a larger number of
crops from the same trial during mini-batch stochastic gradient descent, with the risk of less stable
training. However, we did not observe substantial accuracy decreases when enlarging the number of
simultaneously processed crops (this stability was also observed for images (Shelhamer et al., 2016))
and in the final implementation we processed about 500 crops in one pass, which corresponds to
passing the ConvNet an input of about 1000 samples, twice the 500 samples of one crop. Note
that this method only results in exactly the same predictions as the naı̈ve method when using valid
convolutions (i.e., no padding). For padded convolutions (which we use in the residual network
described in Section 2.4.6), the method no longer results in the same predictions, so it cannot be
used to speed up predictions for individual samples anymore. However, it can still be used if one is
only interested in the average prediction for a trial as we are in this study.
    To further regularize ConvNets trained with cropped training, we designed a new objective
function, which penalizes discrepancies between predictions of neighboring crops. In this tied sample
loss function, we added the cross-entropy of two neighboring predictions to the usual loss of of
                                                                               j                      j
negative log likelihood of the labels. So, denoting the prediction p lk |fk (Xt..t+T 0 ; θ) for crop Xt..t+T 0
                                        j
from time step t to t + T 0 by pf,k (Xt..t+T 0 ), the loss now also depends on the prediction for the next
             j
crop pf,k (Xt..t+T 0 +1 ) and changes from equation 2 to:

                                                K
                                    j         X              j         
                  loss y j , pf,k (Xt..t+T 0) =   −log pf,k (Xt..t+T          j
                                                                     0 ) · δ(y = lk )          +
                                              k=1
                                                                                                               (3)
                                              K
                                              X                   j                  j
                                                    −log   pf,k (Xt..t+T 0 ) · pf,k (Xt..t+T 0 +1 )

                                              k=1

   This is meant to make the ConvNet focus on features which are stable for several neighboring
input crops.

2.5.5   Optimization and early stopping
As optimization method, we used Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) together with a specific early
stopping method, since this consistently yielded good accuracies in our experiments. For details on
Adam and our early stopping strategy, see Supplementary Section A.4.




                                                      15
Tonio Ball                                                                                               2   METHODS


                         Classification Layer




                                                                                               Filters
                         Predictions
                         Layer 4




                                                                                     Filters
                         Unit Output
                         Layer 3




                                                                           Filters
                         Unit Output
                         Layer 2




                                                                 Filters
                         Unit Output
                         Layer 1




                                                       Filters
                         Unit Output
                         Input

                                            Channels
                         EEG Channels         Time bins


Figure 5: ConvNet Receptive Fields Schema. Showing the outputs, inputs and receptive fields
of one unit per layer. Colors indicate different units. Filled rectangles are individual units, solid lines
indicate their direct input from the layer before. Dashed lines indicate the corresponding receptive
field in all previous layers including the original input layer. The receptive field of a unit contains
all inputs that are used to compute the unit’s output. The receptive fields get larger with increasing
depth of the layer. Note that this is only a schema and exact dimensions are not meaningful in this
figure.


2.6     Visualization
2.6.1   Correlating Input Features and Unit Outputs: Network Correlation Maps
As described in the Introduction, currently there is a great interest in understanding how ConvNets
learn to solve different tasks. To this end, methods to visualize functional aspects of ConvNets can
be helpful and the development of such methods is an active area of research. Here, we wanted to
delineate what brain-signal features the ConvNets used and in which layers they extracted these
features. The most obvious restriction on possible features is that units in individual layers of the
ConvNet can only extract features from samples that they have “seen”, i.e., from their so-called
receptive field (see Figure 5). A way to further narrow down the possibly used features is to use
domain-specific prior knowledge and to investigate whether known class-discriminative features are
learned by the ConvNet. Then it is possible to compute a feature value for all receptive fields of all
individual units for each of these class-discriminative features and to measure how much this feature
affects the unit output, for example by computing the correlation between feature values and unit
outputs.
    In this spirit, we propose input-feature unit-output correlation maps as a method to visualize
how networks learn spectral amplitude features. It is known that the amplitudes, for example of
the alpha, beta and gamma bands, provide class-discriminative information for motor tasks (Ball
et al., 2008; Pfurtscheller, 1981; Pfurtscheller and Aranibar, 1979). Therefore, we used the mean
envelope values for several frequency bands as feature values. We correlated these values inside a
receptive field of a unit, as a measure of its total spectral amplitude, with the corresponding unit
outputs to gain insight into how much these amplitude features are used by the ConvNet. Positive



                                                                           16
Tonio Ball                                                                          2   METHODS


or negative correlations that systematically deviate from those found in an untrained net imply that
the ConvNet learned to create representations that contain more information about these features
than before training.
    A limitation of this approach is that it does not distinguish between correlation and causation
(i.e., whether the change in envelope caused the change in the unit output, or whether another
feature, itself correlated to the unit output, caused the change). Therefore, we propose a second
visualization method, where we perturbed the amplitude of existing inputs and observed the change
in predictions of the ConvNets. This complements the first visualization and we refer to this method
as input-perturbation network-prediction correlation map. By using artificial perturbations of the
data, they provide insights in whether changes in specific feature amplitudes cause the network
to change its outputs. For details on the computation of both NCM methods and a ConvNet-
independent visualization, see Supplementary Section A.5.

2.7     Data sets and preprocessing
We evaluated decoding accuracies on two EEG datasets, a smaller public dataset (BCI Competition
IV dataset 2a) for comparing to previously published accuracies and a larger new dataset acquired
in our lab for evaluating the decoding methods with a larger number of training trials (approx.
880 trials per subject, compared to 288 trials in the public set). For details on the datasets, see
Supplementary Section A.6.

2.7.1   EEG preprocessing and evaluating different frequency bands
We only minimally preprocessed the datasets to allow the ConvNets to learn any further trans-
formations themselves. In addition to the full-bandwidth (0–fend -Hz) dataset, we analyzed data
high-pass filtered above 4 Hz (which we call 4–fend -Hz dataset). Filtering was done with a causal
3rd order Butterworth filter. We included the 4–fend -Hz dataset since the highpass filter should
make it less probable that either the networks or FBCSP would use class-discriminative eye move-
ment artifacts to decode the behavior classes, as eye movements generate most power in such low
frequencies (Gratton, 1998). We included this analysis as for the BCI Competition Dataset, special
care to avoid decoding eye-related signals was requested from the publishers of the dataset (Brunner
et al., 2008). For details on other preprocessing steps, see Supplementary Section A.7.




                                                17
Tonio Ball                                                                              3    RESULTS


              Frequency                     Deep            Shallow        Hybrid           Residual
 Dataset                         FBCSP
              range [Hz]                    ConvNet         ConvNet        ConvNet          ConvNet
 BCIC         0–38               68.0       +2.9            +5.7*          +3.6             -0.3
 BCIC         4–38               67.8       +2.3            +4.1           -1.6             -7.0*
 HGD          0–125              91.2       +1.3            -1.9           +0.6             -2.3*
 HGD          4–125              90.9       +0.5            +3.0*          +1.5             -1.1
 Combined     0–fend             82.1       +1.9*           +1.1           +1.8             -1.1
 Combined     4–fend             81.9       +1.2            +3.4**         +0.3             -3.5*

Table 2: Decoding accuracy of FBCSP baseline as well as of the deep and shallow
ConvNets. FBCSP decoding accuracies and difference of deep and shallow ConvNet accuracies to
FBCSP results are given in percent. BCIC: BCI Competition Dataset. HGD: High-Gamma Dataset.
Frequency range is in Hz. Stars indicate statistically significant differences (p-values from Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01, no p-values were below 0.001).


3     Results
3.1    Validation of FBCSP baseline
Result 1 FBCSP baseline reached same results as previously reported in the literature
    As a first step before moving to the evaluation of ConvNet decoding, we validated our FBCSP
implementation, as this was the baseline we compared the ConvNets results against. To validate
our FBCSP implementation, we compared its accuracies to those published in the literature for the
BCI competition IV dataset 2a (called BCI Competition Dataset in the following) (Sakhavi et al.,
2015). Using the same 0.5–2.5 s (relative to trial onset) time window, we reached an accuracy
of 67.6%, statistically not significantly different from theirs (67.0%, p=0.73, Wilcoxon signed-rank
test). Note however, that we used the full trial window for later experiments with convolutional
networks, i.e., from 0.5–4 seconds. This yielded a slightly better accuracy of 67.8%, which was still
not statistically significantly different from the original results on the 0.5–2.5 s window (p=0.73).
For all later comparisons, we use the 0.5–4 seconds time window on all datasets.

3.2    Architectures and design choices
Result 2 ConvNets reached FBCSP accuracies
    Both the deep the shallow ConvNets, with appropriate design choices (see Result 5), reached
similar accuracies as FBCSP-based decoding, with small but statistically significant advantages for
the ConvNets in some settings. For the mean of all subjects of both datasets, accuracies of the shallow
ConvNet on 0–fend Hz and for the deep ConvNet on 4–fend Hz were not statistically significantly
different from FBCSP (see Figure 6 and Table 2). The deep ConvNet on 0–fend Hz and the shallow
ConvNet on 4—fend Hz reached slightly higher (1.9% and 3.3% higher respectively) accuracies
that were also statistically significantly different (p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Note that
all results in this section were obtained with cropped training, for a comparison of cropped and
trial-wise training, see Section 3.3.
Result 3 Confusion matrices for all decoding approaches were similar


                                                  18
Tonio Ball                                                                               3   RESULTS




                       Deep ConvNet                               Shallow ConvNet
              100
               90                  *
               80
Accuracy[%]


               70
0 fend Hz



               60
               50
               40
               30
               20                  c: 0.89                    c: 0.92
              100
               90                                            **
               80
Accuracy[%]




               70
4 fend Hz




               60
               50
               40
               30
               20                  c: 0.94                    c: 0.95
                 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
                   FBCSP Accuracy [%]                          FBCSP Accuracy [%]
       Combined Mean                     BCI Competition                    High­Gamma Dataset
Figure 6: FBCSP vs. ConvNet decoding accuracies. Each small marker represents accuracy of
one subject, the large square markers represent average accuracies across all subjects of both datasets.
Markers above the dashed line indicate experiments where ConvNets performed better than FBCSP
and opposite for markers below the dashed line. Stars indicate statistically significant differences
between FBCSP and ConvNets (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p<0.05: *, p<0.01: **, p<0.001=***).
Bottom left of every plot: linear correlation coefficient between FBCSP and ConvNet decoding
accuracies. Mean accuracies were very similar for ConvNets and FBCSP, the (small) statistically
significant differences were in direction of the ConvNets.



                                                  19
Tonio Ball                                                                                3   RESULTS


             Hand (L)      Hand (L)        Hand (L)       Hand (R)        Hand (R)       Feet
             Hand (R)      Feet            Rest           Feet            Rest           Rest
  FBCSP      82            28              31             3               12             42
    Deep     70            13              27             13              21             26
  Shallow    99            3               34             5               37             73


Table 3: Decoding mistakes between class pairs. Results for the High-Gamma Dataset. Number
of trials where one class was mistaken for the other for each decoding method, summed per class
pair. The largest number of mistakes was between Hand(L) and Hand (R) for all three decoding
methods, the second largest between Feet and Rest (on average across the three decoding methods).
Together, these two class pairs accounted for more than 50% of all mistakes for all three decoding
methods. In contrast, Hand (L and R) and Feet had a small number of mistakes irrespective of the
decoding method used.


    Confusion matrices for the High-Gamma Dataset on 0–fend Hz were very similar for FBCSP and
both ConvNets (see Figure 7). The majority of all mistakes were due to discriminating between
Hand (L) / Hand (R) and Feet / Rest, see Table 3. Seven entries of the confusion matrix had
a statistically significant difference (p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) between the deep and the
shallow ConvNet, in all of them the deep ConvNet performed better. Only two differences between
the deep ConvNet and FBCSP were statistically significant (p<0.05), none for the shallow ConvNet
and FBCSP. Confusion matrices for the BCI Competition Dataset showed a larger variability and
hence a less consistent pattern, possibly because of the much smaller number of trials.
Result 4 Hybrid ConvNets performed slightly, but statistically insignificantly, worse than deep Conv-
Nets
    The hybrid ConvNet performed similar, but slightly worse than the deep ConvNet, i.e., 83.8%
vs 84.0% (p>0.5, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) on the 0–fend -Hz dataset, 82.1% vs 83.1% (p>0.9)
on the 4–fend -Hz dataset. In both cases, the hybrid ConvNet’s accuracy was also not statistically
significantly different from FBCSP (83.8% vs 82.1%, p>0.4 on 0–fend Hz , 82.1% vs 81.9%, p>0.7
on 4–fend Hz).
Result 5 ConvNet design choices substantially affected decoding accuracies
    In the following, results for all design choices are reported for all subjects from both datasets.
For an overview of the different design choices investigated, and the motivation behind these choices,
we refer to Section 2.4.4.
    Batch normalization and dropout significantly increased accuracies.This became especially clear
when omitting both simultaneously (see Figure 8a). Batch normalization provided a larger accuracy
increase for the shallow ConvNet, whereas dropout provided a larger increase for the deep ConvNet.
For both networks and for both frequency bands, the only statistically significant accuracy differences
were accuracy decreases after removing dropout for the deep ConvNet on 0–fend -Hz data or removing
batch normalization and dropout for both networks and frequency ranges (p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed-
rank test). Usage of tied loss did not affect the accuracies very much, never yielding statistically
significant differences (p>0.05). Splitting the first layer into two convolutions had the strongest
accuracy increase on the 0–fend -Hz data for the shallow ConvNet, where it is also the only statistically
significant difference (p<0.01).



                                                   20
Tonio Ball                                                                                                                                                                    3   RESULTS




                                                                      Precision




                                                                                                                                                                  Precision
                                                 FBCSP                                                                               Deep ConvNet
           Hand (R) Hand (L)




                                                                                                       Hand (R) Hand (L)
                                529       53         28      30                                                             520       32         13      26
                                23.6%     2.4%       1.3%    1.3%    82.66%                                                 23.2%     1.4%       0.6%    1.2%    87.99%

                                 29      502         2        9                                                              38     525          12      20
                                 1.3%    22.4%       0.1%    0.4%    92.62%                                                  1.7%    23.5%       0.5%    0.9%    88.24%
  Predictions




                                                                                             Predictions
                                 0        1         509      21                                                              0        1        528 *     19
           Feet




                                                                                                       Feet
                                 0.0%     0.0%      22.7%    0.9%    95.86%                                                  0.0%     0.0%      23.6%    0.8%    96.35%

                                 1        3          21      500                                                             1        1         7*       495      *
           Rest




                                                                                                       Rest
                                 0.0%     0.1%       0.9%    22.3%   95.24%                                                  0.0%     0.0%       0.3%    22.1%   98.21%

Sensitivity 94.63% 89.80% 90.89% 89.29% 91.15%                                       Sensitivity 93.02% 93.92% 94.29% 88.39% 92.40%

                               Hand (L) Hand (R)    Feet     Rest                                                          Hand (L) Hand (R)    Feet     Rest
                                                   Targets                                                                                     Targets
                                                                       Precision




                                        Shallow ConvNet                            3.0
           Hand (R) Hand (L)




                                497       54         3        9
                                22.2%     2.4%       0.1%     0.4%   88.28%
                                                                                   2.25
                                 37      477         6        12
                                 1.7%    21.3%       0.3%     0.5%   89.66%
  Predictions




                                                                                          Trials [%]




                                 1        1         506       21
           Feet




                                                                                   1.5
                                 0.0%     0.0%      22.6%     0.9%   95.65%

                                 24      27         45       518
           Rest




                                 1.1%     1.2%       2.0%    23.1%   84.36%
                                                                                   0.75

Sensitivity 88.91% 85.33% 90.36% 92.50% 89.28%

                               Hand (L) Hand (R)     Feet    Rest                  0.0
                                                   Targets
Figure 7: Confusion matrices for FBCSP- and ConvNet-based decoding. Results are shown
for the High-Gamma Dataset, on 0–fend Hz. Each entry of row r and column c for upper-left 4x4-
square: Number of trials of target r predicted as class c (also written in percent of all trials). Bold
diagonal corresponds to correctly predicted trials of the different classes. The lower-right value
corresponds to overall accuracy. Bottom row corresponds to sensitivity defined as the number of
trials correctly predicted for class c / number of trials for class c. Rightmost column corresponds to
precision defined as the number of trials correctly predicted for class r / number of trials predicted as
class r. Stars indicate statistically significantly different values of ConvNet decoding from FBCSP,
diamonds indicate statistically significantly different values between the shallow and deep ConvNets
. p<0.05: /*, p<0.01: /**, p<0.001:   /***, Wilcoxon signed-rank test.




                                                                                              21
       Tonio Ball                                                                                                                                                                  3      RESULTS


                                                                                                                                                                                        Deep 0 fend Hz
                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                        Shallow 0 fend Hz
                                                                                                                                                                                        Deep 4 fend Hz
                          20                                                                                                                                                            Shallow 4 fend Hz
Accuracy Difference [%]




                           0                                    *                               **        *             *                     **
                                                                                                                 ***
                          20


                          40


                          60


                          80
                                                rm                          ut                                       Norm                               yer                                       ss
                                            h No                        ropo                                  atch                                 st La                                ie d Lo
                                    No B
                                         atc                        No D                                  No B                           plit 1                                    No T
                                                                                                     ut                              No S
                                                                                                ropo
                                                                                           No D
       (a) Impact of design choices applicable to both ConvNets. Shown are the effects from the removal of one aspect from
       the architecture on decoding accuracies. All statistically significant differences were accuracy decreases. Notably, there
       was a clear negative effect of removing both dropout and batch normalization, seen in both ConvNets’ accuracies and
       for both frequency ranges.
                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                        Shallow 0 fend Hz
                                                                                                                                                                                        Shallow 4 fend Hz
                          20                                                                                                                                                            Deep 0 fend Hz
                                                                                                                                                                                        Deep 4 fend Hz
                          10
Accuracy Difference [%]




                           0         *                  **      *                                    **         **          **                             ***
                          10


                          20


                          30


                          40
                                                  log        ean                      ax                 ReL
                                                                                                            U                                   irst                        irst                  conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                         s
                                        tead
                                             of
                                                        Elu M                    Elu M                                                     e)) f                   uare
                                                                                                                                                                        )) f
                                 rt ins                                                                                           n ( Squar                   x(Sq                     6x1+
                                                                                                                                                                                            6x1
                               Sq                                                                                          Me   a                      Ma
                                                                                                                       Log(                        Log(
       (b) Impact of different types of nonlinearities, pooling modes and filter sizes. Results are given independently for
       the deep ConvNet and the shallow ConvNet. As before, all statistically significant differences were from accuracy
       decreases. Notably, replacing ELU by ReLU as nonlinearity led to decreases on both frequency ranges, which were
       both statistically significant.

       Figure 8: Impact of ConvNet design choices on decoding accuracy. Accuracy differences
       of baseline and design choices on x-axis for the 0–fend -Hz and 4–fend -Hz datasets. Each small
       marker represents accuracy difference for one subject, each larger marker represents mean accuracy
       difference across all subjects of both datasets. Bars: standard error of the differences across subjects.
       Stars indicate statistically significant differences to baseline (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p<0.05: *,
       p<0.01: **, p<0.001=***)


                                                                                                     22
Tonio Ball                                                                              3   RESULTS


                            Frequency                       Difference
               Dataset                        Accuracy                        p-value
                            range [Hz]                      to deep
               BCIC         0–38              67.7          -3.2              0.13
               BCIC         4–38              60.8          -9.3              0.004**
               HGD          0–125             88.9          -3.5              0.020*
               HGD          4–125             89.8          -1.6              0.54
               Combined     0–fend            80.6          -3.4              0.004**
               Combined     4–fend            78.5          -4.9              0.01*

Table 4: Decoding accuracies residual networks and difference to deep ConvNets. BCIC:
BCI Competition Dataset. HGD: High-Gamma Dataset. Accuracy is mean accuracy in percent.
P-value from Wilcoxon signed-rank test for the statistical significance of the differences to the deep
ConvNet (cropped training). Accuracies were always slightly worse than deep ConvNet, statistically
significantly different for both frequency ranges on the combined dataset.


   For the deep ConvNet, using ReLU instead of ELU as nonlinearity in all layers worsened per-
formance (p<0.01, see Figure 8b on the right side). Replacing the 10x1 convolutions by 6x1+6x1
convolutions did not statistically significantly affect the performance (p>0.4).
Result 6 Recent deep learning advances substantially increased accuracies
    Figure 9 clearly shows that only recent advances in deep learning methods together (by which we
mean the combination of batch normalization, dropout and ELUs) allowed our deep ConvNet to be
competitive with FBCSP. Without these recent advances, the deep ConvNet had statistically signif-
icantly worse accuracies than FBCSP for both 0–fend -Hz and 4–fend -Hz data (p<0.001, Wilcoxon
signed-rank test). The shallow ConvNet was less strongly affected, with no statistically significant
accuracy difference to FBCSP (p>0.2).
Result 7 Residual network performed worse than deep ConvNet
    Residual networks had consistently worse accuracies than the deep ConvNet as seen in Table 4.
All accuracies were lower and the difference was statistically significant for both frequency ranges
on the combined dataset.

3.3    Training Strategy

Result 8 Cropped training strategy improved deep ConvNet on higher frequencies
   Cropped training increased accuracies statistically significantly for the deep ConvNet on the 4–
fend -Hz data (p<1e-5, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). In all other settings (0–fend -Hz data, shallow
ConvNet), the accuracy differences were not statistically significant (p>0.1) and showed a lot of
variation between subjects.
Result 9 Training ConvNets took substantially longer than FBCSP
   FBCSP was substantially faster to train than the ConvNets with cropped training, by a factor of
27–45 on the BCI Competition Dataset and a factor of 5–9 on the High-Gamma Dataset. Training
times are end-to-end, i.e., include the loading and preprocessing of the data. These times are only


                                                 23
Tonio Ball                                                                           3   RESULTS




                      Deep ConvNet                             Shallow ConvNet
              100
               90
               80
Accuracy[%]



               70                 ***
0 fend Hz




               60
               50
               40
               30
               20
              100
               90
               80
Accuracy[%]




               70
                                  ***
4 fend Hz




               60
               50
               40
               30
               20
                 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
                   FBCSP Accuracy [%]                       FBCSP Accuracy [%]
       Combined Mean                   BCI Competition                  High­Gamma Dataset
Figure 9: Impact of recent advances on overall decoding accuracies. Accuracies without
batch normalization, dropout and ELUs. All conventions as in Figure 6. In contrast to the results
on Figure 6, the deep ConvNet without implementation of these recent methodological advances
performed worse than FBCSP; the difference was statistically significant for both frequency ranges.




                                                24
       Tonio Ball                                                                                                  3     RESULTS


                          30

                          20
                                                                                                                      Deep 0 fend Hz
                                                                                                                      Shallow 0 fend Hz
Accuracy Difference [%]


                          10                                                                                          Deep 4 fend Hz
                                                                                    ***
                           0                                                                                          Shallow 4 fend Hz
                          10

                          20

                          30

                          40

                          50
                                                        z                                        z
                                                   dH                                       dH
                                          0 f en                                   4 f en
       Figure 10: Impact of training strategy (cropped vs trial-wise training) on accuracy.
       Accuracy difference for both frequency ranges and both ConvNets when using cropped training
       instead of trial-wise training. Other conventions as in Figure 8. Cropped training led to better
       accuracies for almost all subjects for the deep ConvNet on the 4–fend -Hz frequency range.

                                                                        Deep                         Shallow
                                Dataset   FBCSP             std                    std                          std
                                                                        ConvNet                      ConvNet
                                BCIC      00:00:33          <00:00:01   00:24:46   00:06:01          00:15:07   00:02:54
                                HGD       00:06:40          00:00:54    1:00:40    00:27:43          00:34:25   00:16:40

       Table 5: Training times. Mean times across subjects given in Hours:Minutes:Seconds. BCIC:
       BCI Competition Dataset. HGD: High-Gamma Dataset. Std is standard deviation across subjects.
       ConvNets take substantially longer to train than FBCSP, especially the deep ConvNet.


       meant to give a rough estimate of the training times as there were differences in the computing envi-
       ronment between ConvNets training and FBCSP training. Most importantly, FBCSP was trained on
       CPU, while the networks were trained on GPUs (see Section A.9). Longer relative training times for
       FBCSP on the High-Gamma Dataset can be explained by the larger number of frequency bands we
       use on the High-Gamma Dataset. Online application of the trained ConvNets does not suffer from
       the same speed disadvantage compared to FBCSP; the fast prediction speed of trained ConvNets
       make them well suited for decoding in real-time BCI applications.

       3.4                     Visualization

       Result 10 Band power topographies show event-related “desynchronization/synchronization” typical
       for motor tasks
           Before moving to ConvNet visualization, we examined the spectral amplitude changes associated
       with the different movement classes in the alpha, beta and gamma frequency bands, finding the
       expected overall scalp topographies (see Figure 11). For example, for the alpha (7–13 Hz) frequency
       band, there was a class-related power decrease (anti-correlation in the class-envelope correlations)
       in the left and right pericentral regions with respect to the hand classes, stronger contralaterally
       to the side of the hand movement , i.e., the regions with pronounced power decreases lie around


                                                                         25
Tonio Ball                                                                            3   RESULTS



                          Envelope class correlation maps
           Hand (L)         Hand (R)              Feet                Rest
                                                                                           max
7 13 Hz




                                                                                                 Correlation coefficient
13 31 Hz




                                                                                           0
71 91 Hz




                                                                                           min
Figure 11: Envelope-class correlations for alpha, beta and gamma bands for all classes.
Average over subjects from the High-Gamma Dataset. Colormaps are scaled per frequency
band/column. This is a ConvNet-independent visualization, for an explanation of the computa-
tion see Section A.5.1. Scalp plots show spatial distributions of class-related spectral amplitude
changes well in line with the literature.


the primary sensorimotor hand representation areas. For the feet class, there was a power decrease
located around the vertex, i.e., approx. above the primary motor foot area. As expected, opposite
changes (power increases) with a similar topography were visible for the gamma band (71–91 Hz).
Result 11 Input-feature unit-output correlation maps show learning progression through the ConvNet
layers
    We used our input-feature unit-output correlation mapping technique to examine the question
how correlations between EEG power and the behavioral classes are learnt by the network. Figure
12 shows the input-feature unit-output correlation maps for all four conv-pooling-blocks of the deep
ConvNet, for the group of subjects of the High-Gamma Dataset. As a comparison, the Figure
also contains the correlation between the power and the classes themselves as described in Section
A.5.1. The differences of the absolute correlations show which regions were more correlated with
the unit outputs of the trained ConvNet than with the unit outputs of the untrained ConvNet;
these correlations are naturally undirected. Overall, the input-feature unit-output correlation maps
became more similar to the power-class correlation maps with increasing layer depth. This gradual
progression was also reflected in an increasing correlation of the unit outputs with the class labels


                                                 26
Tonio Ball                                                                                             3   RESULTS


                  Input­feature unit­output network correlation maps
                                                                                      Power­class            0.16
           Conv­pool block 1 Conv­pool block 2 Conv­pool block 3 Conv­pool block 4   correlation map
                                                                                                             0.12
7 13 Hz




                                                                                                             0.08




                                                                                                                    Correlation difference
                                                                                                             0.04

                                                                                                             0.00
13 31 Hz




                                                                                                              0.04

                                                                                                              0.08
71 91 Hz




                                                                                                              0.12

                                                                                                              0.16

Figure 12: Power input-feature unit-output network correlation maps for all conv-pool
blocks of the deep ConvNet. Correlation difference indicates the difference of correlation coeffi-
cients obtained with the trained and untrained model for each electrode respectively and is visualized
as a topographic scalp plot. Details see Section A.5.1. Rightmost column shows the correlation be-
tween the envelope of the EEG signals in each of the three analyzed frequency bands and the four
classes. Notably, the absolute values of the correlation differences became larger in the deeper layers
and converged to patterns that were very similar to those obtained from the power-class correlations.


with increasing depth of the layer (see Figure 13).
Result 12 Input-perturbation network-prediction correlation maps show causal effect of spatially
localized band power features on ConvNet predictions
    We show three visualizations extracted from input-perturbation network-prediction correlations,
the first two to show the frequency profile of the causal effects, the third to show their topography.
    Thus, first, we computed the mean across electrodes for each class separately to show correlations
between classes and frequency bands. We see plausible results, for example, for the rest class, positive
correlations in the alpha and beta bands and negative correlations in the gamma band (see Figure
14).
    Then, second, by taking the mean of the absolute values both over all classes and electrodes, we
computed a general frequency profile. This showed clear peaks in the alpha, beta and gamma bands
(see Figure 15). Similar peaks were seen in the means of the CSP binary decoding accuracies for
the same frequency range.
    Thirdly, scalp maps of the input-perturbation effects on network predictions for the different
frequency bands, as shown in Figure 16, show spatial distributions expected for motor tasks in the
alpha, beta and — for the first time for such a non-invasive EEG decoding visualization — for the
high gamma band. These scalp maps directly reflect the behavior of the ConvNets and one needs to


                                                             27
Tonio Ball                                                                                       3     RESULTS


                          0.9
                                                                                 Trained
                          0.8
                          0.7
                                                                                 Untrained
            Correlation   0.6                                                    Difference
                          0.5
                          0.4                                               CPB: Conv­Pool­Block
                          0.3                                               CL: Classification Layer
                          0.2
                          0.1
                          0.0
                                  B1        B2     B3        B4        CL
                                CP     CP        CP       CP
Figure 13: Absolute correlations between unit outputs and class labels. Each dot represents
absolute correlation coefficients for one layer of the deep ConvNet. Solid lines indicate result of taking
mean over absolute correlation coefficients between classes and filters. Dashed lines indicate result
of first taking the maximum absolute correlation coefficient per class (maximum over filters) and
then the mean over classes. Absolute correlations increased almost linearly with increasing depth of
the layer.




                                                                                                             Correlation
Hand (L)                                                                                               0.0004
Hand (R)                                                                                               0.0000
   Feet
   Rest                                                                                                 0.0004
           0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120
                                                      Frequency [Hz]
Figure 14: Input-perturbation network-prediction correlations for all frequencies for the
deep ConvNet, per class. Plausible correlations, e.g., rest positively, other classes negatively
correlated with the amplitude changes in frequency range from 20 Hz to 30 Hz.


be careful when making inferences about the data from them. For example, the positive correlation
on the right side of the scalp for the Hand (R) class in the alpha band only means the ConvNet
increased its prediction when the amplitude at these electrodes was increased independently of other
frequency bands and electrodes. It does not imply that there was an increase of amplitude for the
right hand class in the data. Rather, this correlation could be explained by the ConvNet reducing
common noise between both locations, for more explanations of these effects in case of linear models
see Haufe et al. (2014). Nevertheless, for the first time in non-invasive EEG, these maps clearly
revealed the global somatotopic organization of causal contributions of motor cortical gamma band
activity to decoding right and left hand as well as foot movements.
    In summary, our visualization methods proved useful to map the spatial distribution of the
features learned by the ConvNets to perform single-trial decoding of the different movement classes
and in different physiologically important frequency bands.




                                                               28
    Tonio Ball                                                                                       3   RESULTS




                                                                                                                  CSP Accuracy [%]
network­prediction
Input­perturbation


                            0.002400                                                                          95
    correlation

                            0.002125                                                                          85
                            0.001850                                                                          75
                            0.001575                                                                          65
                            0.001300                                                                          55
                                       5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115
                                                                   Frequency [Hz]
    Figure 15: Absolute input-perturbation network-prediction correlation frequency profile
    for the deep ConvNet. Mean absolute correlation value across classes. CSP binary decoding
    accuracies for different frequency bands for comparison, averaged across subjects and class pairs.
    Peaks in alpha, beta and gamma band for input-perturbation network-prediction correlations and
    CSP accuracies.




                             Hand (L)           Hand (R)            Feet              Rest               max
71 91 Hz 13 31 Hz 7 13 Hz




                                                                                                             Correlation
                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                         min
    Figure 16: Input-perturbation network-prediction correlation maps for the deep Conv-
    Net. Correlation of class predictions and amplitude changes. Averaged over all subjects of the
    High-Gamma Dataset. Colormaps are scaled per scalp plot. Plausible scalp maps for all frequency
    bands, e.g. contralateral positive correlations for the hand classes in the gamma band.




                                                                   29
Tonio Ball                                                                          4   DISCUSSION


4       Discussion
This study systematically evaluated ConvNet of different architectures and with different design
choices against a validated baseline method, i.e. FBCSP. This study shows that ConvNets allow ac-
curate motor decoding from EEG, that recent deep-learning techniques are critical to boost ConvNet
performance, and that a cropped ConvNet training strategy can further increase decoding perfor-
mance. Thus, ConvNets can achieve successful end-to-end learning from EEG with just minimal
preprocessing. This study also demonstrates that novel ConvNets visualization offer new possibilities
in brain mapping of informative EEG features.

4.1     Architectures and design choices
4.1.1    ConvNets vs. FBCSP
Our results demonstrate that deep and shallow ConvNets, with appropriate design choices, are able
to — at least — reach the accuracies of FBCSP for motor decoding from EEG (see Result 2).
In our main comparison for the combined datasets (see Table 2), the accuracies of both deep and
shallow ConvNets are very close and slightly higher than the accuracies of FBCSP. As filter bank
common spatial patterns is the de facto standard for motor decoding from EEG recordings, this
strongly implies ConvNets are also a suitable method for motor decoding. While we have shown
deep ConvNets to be competitive with standard FBCSP, a lot of variants of FBCSP exist. For
example, many regularized variants of CSP exist that can be used inside FBCSP (Lotte and Guan,
2011; Samek, 2014); a comparison to these could further show the exact tradeoff between the more
generic ConvNets and the more domain-specific FBCSP.

4.1.2    Role of recent deep learning advances
Success depends on using recent developments in deep learning. The accuracy increase that we
demonstrate when using batch normalization, dropout and exponential linear units implies that
general advances in deep learning can also improve brain-signal decoding. The improvement from
using these techniques replicates recent findings in computer vision and other fields. In our study,
improvements were most pronounced for the deep ConvNet on 4–fend Hz data (see Result 6), in-
dicating that the networks can easily overfit in this setting, where band power features are likely
dominant. This is consistent with our observation that cropped training, which combats overfitting
by increasing the number of training examples, also drastically increased accuracies on 4–fend Hz
data (see Result 8). There seemed to be some further gains when combining both batch normal-
ization and dropout, albeit with some variation across architectures and frequency bands. This
improvement was not clear from the start as batch normalization can in some cases remove the need
for dropout (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015), however this improvement was also found in another study
using ConvNets to decode EEG data (Lawhern et al., 2016). The smaller improvement batch nor-
malization yielded for the deep ConvNet is consistent with the claim that ELUs already allow fast
learning (Clevert et al., 2016). However, all of these findings are limited by the fact that there can
be interactions between these methods and with all other hyperparameters. As of yet, we also do
not have a clear explanation for the large difference in accuracies obtained with ReLUs compared to
ELUs; a recent study on computer vision tasks did not find these differences (Mishkin et al., 2016).
Mathematically and empirically analyzing the behavior of ELUs and ReLUs for oscillatory signals
and typical EEG noise might shed some light on plausible reasons.


                                                 30
Tonio Ball                                                                             4   DISCUSSION


4.1.3   ConvNet architectures and interactions with discriminative features
Another finding of our study was that the shallow ConvNets performed as good as the deep ConvNets,
in contrast to the hybrid and residual architectures (see Results 2, 4 and 7). These observations could
possibly be better understood by investigating more closely what discriminative features there are in
the EEG data and what architectures can hence best use them. For example, it would be interesting
to study the effect of more layers when the networks use mostly EEG band power features, phase-
related features, or a combination thereof (c.f. Hammer et al. (2013), for the role of power and phase
in motor decoding) and whether there are features for which a deeper hierarchical representation
could be beneficial.
    We observed that squaring was important for the shallow but not for the deep ConvNet (see Result
5). The worse performance of the shallow ConvNet with ELU instead of squaring may be explained
as follows. Squaring naturally allows the network to more easily extract band power features:
In combination with the approximately zero-mean input, the network would already capture the
signal’s variance by squaring. To see this, assume that the two bandpass-filter-like and spatial-filter-
like convolutional layers extract an oscillatory source in a specific frequency band; the squaring and
mean pooling then directly computes the variance of this source in the pool regions. With ELUs
instead of squaring, the positive parts of the oscillation would remain unchanged while the negative
ones would be suppressed; the mean of the pool region would still be larger for larger amplitudes of
the oscillation, but less strongly so than for the square activation. The effects of ELU and squaring
for the deep ConvNet are less straightforward to analyze, since the pooling regions in our deep
ConvNet were much smaller than for the shallow ConvNet (3 vs 75 samples) and might thus not
cover a large enough time span to compute a very robust and informative variance average.

4.1.4   Possibilities for substantial decoding accuracy improvements?
In the analyses presented here, ConvNets did not improve accuracies over FBCSP by a large margin.
Significant improvements, if present, were never larger than 3.5 percent on the combined dataset
with a lot of variation per subject (see Result 2). However, the deep ConvNets as used here may
have learned features different from FBCSP, which could explain their higher accuracies in the lower
frequencies where band power features may be less important (Hammer et al., 2013). Nevertheless,
ConvNets failed to clearly outperform FBCSP in our experiments. Several reasons might contribute
to this: the datasets might still not be large enough to reveal the full potential of deeper convolutional
networks in EEG decoding; or the class-discriminative features might not have enough hierarchical
structure which deeper ConvNets could exploit. The dataset-size issue could be solved by either
creating larger datasets or also by using transfer learning approaches across subjects and/or other
datasets. Further analysis of the data itself and of the convolutional networks might help to shed
light whether there are features with a lot of hierarchical structure. Finally, recurrent networks
could exploit signal changes that happen on longer timescales, e.g., electrodes slowly losing scalp
contact over the course of a session, changes of the electrode cap position or nonstationarities in
the brain signals. Thus, there is clearly still a large potential for methodological improvement in
ConvNet-based EEG decoding.
    These methodological improvements might also come from further methodological advances in
deep learning, such as newer forms of hyperparameter optimization, in case these advances also
translate to even better EEG decoding accuracies. As discussed above, recent advances like dropout,
batch normalization and exponential linear units can substantially improve the performance of EEG
decoding with ConvNets, especially for our deep architecture. Therefore, using other recent tech-


                                                   31
Tonio Ball                                                                           4   DISCUSSION


niques, such as newer forms of hyperparameter optimization (Domhan et al., 2015; Klein et al., 2016;
Springenberg et al., 2016) hold promise to further increase accuracies of ConvNets for brain-signal
decoding. Furthermore, as the field is still evolving at a fast pace, new techniques can be expected to
be developed and might then also benefit brain-signal decoders using convolutional neural networks.
    However, methodological improvements may also happen in the broad field of “non-ConvNet”
approaches. Obviously, currently no final verdict is possible about an “optimal” method for EEG
decoding, if there is a single best method for the large variety of EEG decoding problems at all. The
findings of the present study however support that ConvNet-based decoding is a contender in this
competition.

4.1.5   Further potential advantages of ConvNets for brain-signal decoding
Besides the decoding performance, there are also other potential advantages of using deep ConvNets
for brain-signal decoding. First, several use cases desirable for brain-signal decoding are very easy to
do with deep ConvNets iteratively trained in an end-to-end fashion: Deep ConvNets can be applied
to other types of tasks such as as workload estimation, error- or event-related potential decoding (as
others have started (Lawhern et al., 2016)) or even other types of recordings such as MEG or ECoG.
Also, ConvNets, due to their iterative training, have a natural way of pretraining and finetuning;
for example a ConvNet can be pretrained on data from the past or data from other subjects and
then be finetuned with new data from a new subject. Finetuning can be as simple as continuing the
iterative training process on the new data, possibly with a smaller learning rate and this finetuning
can also be used to perform supervised online adaptation. Second, due to their joint optimization,
single ConvNets can be building blocks for more sophisticated setups of multiple ConvNets. One
recent example attempts to create ConvNets that are robust to changes in the input distribution
(Ganin et al., 2016). This could be used to alleviate the long-standing EEG decoding problem of
changes in the EEG signal distribution from one session to another.

4.2     Training strategy
4.2.1   Cropped training effect on accuracies
We observed that cropped training was necessary for the deep ConvNet to reach competitive accu-
racies on the dataset excluding very low frequencies (see Result 8). The large increase in accuracy
with cropped training for the deep network on the 4–fend -Hz data might indicate a large number
of training examples is necessary to learn to extract band power features. This makes sense as the
shifted neighboring windows may contain the same, but shifted, oscillatory signals. These shifts
could prevent the network from overfitting on phase information within the trial, which is less im-
portant in the higher than the lower frequencies (Hammer et al., 2013). This could also explain
why other studies on ConvNets for brain-signal decoding, which did not use cropped training, but
where band power might be the most discriminative feature, have used fairly shallow architectures
and sometimes found them to be superior to deeper versions (Stober et al., 2014).

4.2.2   Suitability for online decoding
Our cropped training strategy appears particularly well-applicable for online brain-signal decoding.
As described above, it may offer performance advantages compared with conventional (non-cropped)
training. Additionally, cropped training allows for a useful calibration of the trade-off between


                                                  32
Tonio Ball                                                                          4   DISCUSSION


decoding delay and decoding accuracy in online settings. The duration from trial start until the
last sample of the first crop should roughly correspond to the minimum time needed to decode a
control signal. Hence, smaller crops can allow less delay — the first small crop could end at an
early sample within the trial without containing too many timesteps from before the trial that could
otherwise disturb the training process. Conversely, larger crops that still contain mostly timesteps
from within the trial imply a larger delay until a control signal is decoded while possibly increasing
the decoding accuracy due to more information contained in the larger crops. These intuitions should
be confirmed in online experiments.

4.3     Visualization
4.3.1   Insights from current visualizations
In addition to exploring how ConvNets can be successfully used to decode information from the
EEG, we have also developed and tested two complementary methods to visualize what ConvNets
learn from the EEG data. So far, the literature on using ConvNets for brain-signal decoding has, for
example, visualized weights or outputs of ConvNet layers (Bashivan et al., 2016; Santana et al., 2014;
Stober, 2016; Yang et al., 2015), determined inputs that maximally activate specific convolutional
filters (Bashivan et al., 2016), or described attempts at synthesizing the preferred input of a convo-
lutional filter (Bashivan et al., 2016) (see Supplementary Section A.1 for a more extensive overview).
Here, we applied both a correlative and a causally interpretable visualization method to visualize the
frequencies and spatial distribution of band power features used by the networks. The visualizations
showed plausible spatial distributions for motor tasks in the alpha, beta and gamma bands (see Sec-
tion 3.4). The input-feature unit-output and the input-perturbation network-prediction correlation
maps together clearly showed that the deep ConvNet learned to extract and use band power features
with specific spatial distributions. Hence, while the computation of power was built into both the
FBCSP and shallow ConvNet, our deep ConvNets successfully learned to perform the computation
of band power features from the raw input in an end-to-end manner. Our network correlation maps
can readily show spatial distributions per subject and for the whole group of subjects. Thus, our
network correlation maps proved useful as a technique for spatially mapping the features learned by
the ConvNets to perform single-trial decoding.

4.3.2   Feature discovery through more sophisticated visualizations?
One limitation of the visualizations presented here is that so far, we only designed them to show
how ConvNets use known band power features. However, it could be even more interesting to
investigate whether novel or so-far unknown features are used and to characterize them. This could
be especially informative for tasks where the discriminative features are less well known than for
motor decoding, e.g. for less-investigated tasks such as decoding of task performance (Meinel et al.,
2016). But even for the data used in this study, our results show hints that deep ConvNets used
different features than shallow ConvNets as well as the FBCSP-based decoding, since there are
statistically significant differences between their confusion matrices (see Result 3). This further
strengthens the motivation to explore what features the deep ConvNet exploits, for example using
visualizations that show what parts of a trial are relevant for the classification decision or what a
specific convolutional filter/unit output encodes. Newer visualization methods such as layer-wise
relevance propagation (Bach et al., 2015; Montavon et al., 2017), inverting convolutional networks



                                                 33
Tonio Ball                                                                      4   DISCUSSION


with convolutional networks (Dosovitskiy and Brox, 2016) or synthesizing preferred inputs of units
(Nguyen et al., 2016) could be promising next steps in that direction.

4.4   Conclusion
In conclusion, ConvNets are not only a novel, promising tool in the EEG decoding toolbox, but
combined with innovative visualization techniques, they may also open up new windows for EEG-
based brain mapping.




                                               34
Tonio Ball                                                                          4   DISCUSSION


Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the BrainLinks-BrainTools Cluster of Excellence (DFG grant EXC1086)
and by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, grant Motor-BIC 13GW0053D).

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper.




                                                 35
Tonio Ball                                                                            REFERENCES


References
Abdel-Hamid, O., Mohamed, A. r., Jiang, H., Deng, L., Penn, G., and Yu, D. (2014). Convolu-
 tional Neural Networks for Speech Recognition. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
 Language Processing, 22(10):1533–1545.
Ang, K. K., Chin, Z. Y., Zhang, H., and Guan, C. (2008). Filter Bank Common Spatial Pat-
 tern (FBCSP) in Brain-Computer Interface. In IEEE International Joint Conference on Neu-
 ral Networks, 2008. IJCNN 2008. (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence), pages
 2390–2397.
Antoniades, A., Spyrou, L., Took, C. C., and Sanei, S. (2016). Deep learning for epileptic intracranial
 EEG data. In 2016 IEEE 26th International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing
 (MLSP), pages 1–6.
Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.-R., and Samek, W. (2015). On Pixel-
  Wise Explanations for Non-Linear Classifier Decisions by Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation.
  PLOS ONE, 10(7):e0130140.
Ball, T., Demandt, E., Mutschler, I., Neitzel, E., Mehring, C., Vogt, K., Aertsen, A., and Schulze-
  Bonhage, A. (2008). Movement related activity in the high gamma range of the human EEG.
  NeuroImage, 41(2):302–310.
Bashivan, P., Rish, I., Yeasin, M., and Codella, N. (2016). Learning Representations from EEG with
  Deep Recurrent-Convolutional Neural Networks. In arXiv:1511.06448 [cs]. arXiv: 1511.06448.
Blankertz, B., Tomioka, R., Lemm, S., Kawanabe, M., and Muller, K.-R. (2008). Optimizing Spatial
  filters for Robust EEG Single-Trial Analysis. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 25(1):41–56.
Brunner, C., Leeb, R., Müller-Putz, G., Schlögl, A., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2008). BCI Competi-
  tion 2008–Graz data set A. Institute for Knowledge Discovery (Laboratory of Brain-Computer
  Interfaces), Graz University of Technology, pages 136–142.
Buzsáki, G. and Draguhn, A. (2004).        Neuronal Oscillations in Cortical Networks.       Science,
  304(5679):1926–1929.
Canolty, R. T., Edwards, E., Dalal, S. S., Soltani, M., Nagarajan, S. S., Kirsch, H. E., Berger, M. S.,
  Barbaro, N. M., and Knight, R. T. (2006). High gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations
  in human neocortex. Science, 313(5793):1626–1628.
Cecotti, H. and Graser, A. (2011). Convolutional Neural Networks for P300 Detection with Ap-
  plication to Brain-Computer Interfaces. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 33(3):433–445.
Chatrian, G. E., Petersen, M. C., and Lazarte, J. A. (1959). The blocking of the rolandic wicket
  rhythm and some central changes related to movement. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neu-
  rophysiology, 11(3):497–510.
Chin, Z. Y., Ang, K. K., Wang, C., Guan, C., and Zhang, H. (2009). Multi-class filter bank common
  spatial pattern for four-class motor imagery BCI. In Annual International Conference of the IEEE
  Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2009. EMBC 2009, pages 571–574.


                                                  36
Tonio Ball                                                                          REFERENCES


Clevert, D.-A., Unterthiner, T., and Hochreiter, S. (2016). Fast and Accurate Deep Network Learning
  by Exponential Linear Units (ELUs). In ArXiv e-prints, volume 1511, page arXiv:1511.07289.
Crone, N. E., Miglioretti, D. L., Gordon, B., and Lesser, R. P. (1998). Functional mapping of human
  sensorimotor cortex with electrocorticographic spectral analysis. II. Event-related synchronization
  in the gamma band. Brain, 121(12):2301–2315.
Darvas, F., Scherer, R., Ojemann, J. G., Rao, R. P., Miller, K. J., and Sorensen, L. B. (2010). High
 gamma mapping using EEG. NeuroImage, 49(1):930–938.
Das, K., Giesbrecht, B., and Eckstein, M. P. (2010). Predicting variations of perceptual performance
 across individuals from neural activity using pattern classifiers. NeuroImage, 51(4):1425–1437.
Dieleman, S., Heilman, M., Kelly, J., Thoma, M., Rasul, D. K., Battenberg, E., Weideman, H.,
  Sønderby, S. K., instagibbs, Britefury, Raffel, C., Degrave, J., peterderivaz, Jon, Fauw, J. D.,
  diogo149, Nouri, D., Schlüter, J., Maturana, D., CongLiu, Olson, E., McFee, B., and takacsg84
  (2015). Lasagne: First release. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.27878.
Domhan, T., Springenberg, J. T., and Hutter, F. (2015). Speeding Up Automatic Hyperparameter
 Optimization of Deep Neural Networks by Extrapolation of Learning Curves. In Twenty-Fourth
 International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Dosovitskiy, A. and Brox, T. (2016). Inverting Visual Representations with Convolutional Networks.
 In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). arXiv:1506.02753.
Duchi, J., Hazan, E., and Singer, Y. (2011). Adaptive Subgradient Methods for Online Learning
 and Stochastic Optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Jul):2121–2159.
Gadhoumi, K., Lina, J.-M., Mormann, F., and Gotman, J. (2016). Seizure prediction for therapeutic
 devices: A review. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 260:270–282.
Galar, M., Fernández, A., Barrenechea, E., Bustince, H., and Herrera, F. (2011). An overview of
 ensemble methods for binary classifiers in multi-class problems: Experimental study on one-vs-one
 and one-vs-all schemes. Pattern Recognition, 44(8):1761–1776.
Ganin, Y., Ustinova, E., Ajakan, H., Germain, P., Larochelle, H., Laviolette, F., Marchand, M.,
 and Lempitsky, V. (2016). Domain-Adversarial Training of Neural Networks. Journal of Machine
 Learning Research, 17(59):1–35.
Giusti, A., Cireşan, D. C., Masci, J., Gambardella, L. M., and Schmidhuber, J. (2013). Fast im-
  age scanning with deep max-pooling convolutional neural networks. In 2013 IEEE International
  Conference on Image Processing, pages 4034–4038.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016).              Deep Learning.       MIT Press.
 http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
Gratton, G. (1998). Dealing with artifacts: The EOG contamination of the event-related brain
  potential. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 30(1):44–53.
Hajinoroozi, M., Mao, Z., Jung, T.-P., Lin, C.-T., and Huang, Y. (2016). EEG-based prediction of
 driver’s cognitive performance by deep convolutional neural network. Signal Processing: Image
 Communication, 47:549–555.


                                                 37
Tonio Ball                                                                           REFERENCES


Hammer, J., Fischer, J., Ruescher, J., Schulze-Bonhage, A., Aertsen, A., and Ball, T. (2013). The role
  of ECoG magnitude and phase in decoding position, velocity, and acceleration during continuous
  motor behavior. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7:200.
Hammer, J., Pistohl, T., Fischer, J., Kršek, P., Tomášek, M., Marusič, P., Schulze-Bonhage, A.,
  Aertsen, A., and Ball, T. (2016). Predominance of Movement Speed Over Direction in Neuronal
  Population Signals of Motor Cortex: Intracranial EEG Data and A Simple Explanatory Model.
  Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY), 26(6):2863–2881.
Haufe, S., Meinecke, F., Görgen, K., Dähne, S., Haynes, J.-D., Blankertz, B., and Bießmann, F.
  (2014). On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear models in multivariate neuroimaging.
  NeuroImage, 87:96–110.

He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2015). Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.
  arXiv:1512.03385 [cs]. arXiv: 1512.03385.
Hertel, L., Barth, E., Käster, T., and Martinetz, T. (2015). Deep convolutional neural networks as
  generic feature extractors. In 2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN),
  pages 1–4.

Howard, A. G. (2013). Some Improvements on Deep Convolutional Neural Network Based Image
  Classification. arXiv:1312.5402 [cs]. arXiv: 1312.5402.
Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. (2015). Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Re-
  ducing Internal Covariate Shift. In Proceedings of The 32nd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 448–456.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Proceedings of
  the 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Klein, A., Falkner, S., Bartels, S., Hennig, P., and Hutter, F. (2016). Fast Bayesian Optimization
  of Machine Learning Hyperparameters on Large Datasets. arXiv:1605.07079 [cs, stat]. arXiv:
  1605.07079.
Knops, A., Thirion, B., Hubbard, E. M., Michel, V., and Dehaene, S. (2009). Recruitment of an
 Area Involved in Eye Movements During Mental Arithmetic. Science, 324(5934):1583–1585.
Koles, Z. J., Lazar, M. S., and Zhou, S. Z. (1990). Spatial patterns underlying population differences
 in the background EEG. Brain Topography, 2(4):275–284.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 1097–1105.
Kurth-Nelson, Z., Economides, M., Dolan, R. J., and Dayan, P. (2016). Fast Sequences of Non-spatial
 State Representations in Humans. Neuron, 91(1):194–204.

Lawhern, V. J., Solon, A. J., Waytowich, N. R., Gordon, S. M., Hung, C. P., and Lance, B. J.
  (2016). EEGNet: A Compact Convolutional Network for EEG-based Brain-Computer Interfaces.
  arXiv:1611.08024 [cs, q-bio, stat]. arXiv: 1611.08024.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444.


                                                 38
Tonio Ball                                                                            REFERENCES


Ledoit, O. and Wolf, M. (2004). A well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional covariance
  matrices. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 88(2):365–411.
Li, X. and Wu, X. (2015). Constructing long short-term memory based deep recurrent neural
  networks for large vocabulary speech recognition. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 4520–4524.
Liang, J., Lu, R., Zhang, C., and Wang, F. (2016). Predicting Seizures from Electroencephalog-
  raphy Recordings: A Knowledge Transfer Strategy. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on
  Healthcare Informatics (ICHI), pages 184–191.
Lotte, F., Congedo, M., Lécuyer, A., Lamarche, F., and Arnaldi, B. (2007). A review of classification
  algorithms for EEG-based brain–computer interfaces. Journal of Neural Engineering, 4(2):R1.
Lotte, F. and Guan, C. (2011). Regularizing Common Spatial Patterns to Improve BCI Designs:
  Unified Theory and New Algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 58(2):355–
  362.
Manor, R. and Geva, A. B. (2015). Convolutional Neural Network for Multi-Category Rapid Serial
 Visual Presentation BCI. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 9:146.
Manor, R., Mishali, L., and Geva, A. B. (2016). Multimodal Neural Network for Rapid Serial Visual
 Presentation Brain Computer Interface. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 10.
Meinel, A., Castaño-Candamil, S., Reis, J., and Tangermann, M. (2016). Pre-Trial EEG-Based
 Single-Trial Motor Performance Prediction to Enhance Neuroergonomics for a Hand Force Task.
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, page 170.
Mishkin, D., Sergievskiy, N., and Matas, J. (2016). Systematic evaluation of CNN advances on the
 ImageNet. arXiv:1606.02228 [cs]. arXiv: 1606.02228.
Moghimi, S., Kushki, A., Guerguerian, A. M., and Chau, T. (2013). A review of EEG-based brain-
 computer interfaces as access pathways for individuals with severe disabilities. Assistive technology:
 the official journal of RESNA, 25(2):99–110.
Montavon, G., Lapuschkin, S., Binder, A., Samek, W., and Müller, K.-R. (2017). Explaining non-
 linear classification decisions with deep Taylor decomposition. Pattern Recognition, 65:211–222.
Monto, S., Palva, S., Voipio, J., and Palva, J. M. (2008). Very slow EEG fluctuations predict the
 dynamics of stimulus detection and oscillation amplitudes in humans. The Journal of neuroscience,
 28(33):8268–8272.
Münßinger, J. I., Halder, S., Kleih, S. C., Furdea, A., Raco, V., Hösle, A., and Kübler, A. (2010).
 Brain Painting: First Evaluation of a New Brain–Computer Interface Application with ALS-
 Patients and Healthy Volunteers. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 4.
Nasse, F., Thurau, C., and Fink, G. A. (2009). Face detection using gpu-based convolutional neural
  networks. In International Conference on Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns, pages 83–90.
  Springer.
Nguyen, A., Dosovitskiy, A., Yosinski, Jason band Brox, T., and Clune, J. (2016). Synthesizing the
  preferred inputs for neurons in neural networks via deep generator networks. NIPS 29.


                                                  39
Tonio Ball                                                                            REFERENCES


Nijboer, F., Sellers, E. W., Mellinger, J., Jordan, M. A., Matuz, T., Furdea, A., Halder, S., Mochty,
  U., Krusienski, D. J., Vaughan, T. M., Wolpaw, J. R., Birbaumer, N., and Kübler, A. (2008).
  A P300-based brain-computer interface for people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Clinical
  Neurophysiology: Official Journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology,
  119(8):1909–1916.

Nunez, P. L. and Srinivasan, R. (2006). Electric Fields of the Brain: The Neurophysics of EEG.
 Oxford University Press, Oxford ; New York, 2nd ed. edition.
Page, A., Shea, C., and Mohsenin, T. (2016). Wearable seizure detection using convolutional neural
  networks with transfer learning. In 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems
  (ISCAS), pages 1086–1089.

Pfurtscheller, G. (1981). Central beta rhythm during sensorimotor activities in man. Electroen-
  cephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 51(3):253–264.
Pfurtscheller, G. and Aranibar, A. (1977). Event-related cortical desynchronization detected
  by power measurements of scalp EEG. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
  42(6):817–826.

Pfurtscheller, G. and Aranibar, A. (1978). Occipital rhythmic activity within the alpha band during
  conditioned externally paced movement. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
  45(2):226–235.
Pfurtscheller, G. and Aranibar, A. (1979). Evaluation of event-related desynchronization (ERD)
  preceding and following voluntary self-paced movement. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neu-
  rophysiology, 46(2):138–146.
Pfurtscheller, G. and Berghold, A. (1989). Patterns of cortical activation during planning of voluntary
  movement. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 72(3):250–258.
Pfurtscheller, G., Flotzinger, D., and Neuper, C. (1994). Differentiation between finger, toe and
  tongue movement in man based on 40 Hz EEG. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysi-
  ology, 90(6):456–460.
Quandt, F., Reichert, C., Hinrichs, H., Heinze, H. J., Knight, R. T., and Rieger, J. W. (2012).
 Single trial discrimination of individual finger movements on one hand: A combined MEG and
 EEG study. NeuroImage, 59(4):3316–3324.

Ramos-Murguialday, A., Broetz, D., Rea, M., Läer, L., Yilmaz, O., Brasil, F. L., Liberati, G.,
  Curado, M. R., Garcia-Cossio, E., Vyziotis, A., Cho, W., Agostini, M., Soares, E., Soekadar, S.,
  Caria, A., Cohen, L. G., and Birbaumer, N. (2013). Brain–machine interface in chronic stroke
  rehabilitation: A controlled study. Annals of Neurology, 74(1):100–108.

Ramoser, H., Muller-Gerking, J., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2000). Optimal spatial filtering of single
  trial EEG during imagined hand movement. IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering,
  8(4):441–446.
Ren, Y. and Wu, Y. (2014). Convolutional deep belief networks for feature extraction of EEG signal.
  In 2014 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 2850–2853.


                                                  40
Tonio Ball                                                                        REFERENCES


Rivet, B., Souloumiac, A., Attina, V., and Gibert, G. (2009). xDAWN Algorithm to Enhance
  Evoked Potentials: Application to Brain-Computer Interface. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
  Engineering, 56(8):2035–2043.
Sainath, T. N., Kingsbury, B., Saon, G., Soltau, H., Mohamed, A.-r., Dahl, G., and Ramabhadran,
  B. (2015a). Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Large-scale Speech Tasks. Neural Networks,
  64:39–48.
Sainath, T. N., Vinyals, O., Senior, A., and Sak, H. (2015b). Convolutional, Long Short-Term
  Memory, fully connected Deep Neural Networks. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 4580–4584.

Sak, H., Senior, A., Rao, K., and Beaufays, F. (2015). Fast and Accurate Recurrent Neural Network
  Acoustic Models for Speech Recognition. In arXiv:1507.06947 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1507.06947.
Sakhavi, S., Guan, C., and Yan, S. (2015). Parallel convolutional-linear neural network for motor
  imagery classification. In Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2015 23rd European, pages
  2736–2740.

Samek, W. (2014). On robust spatial filtering of EEG in nonstationary environments. PhD thesis,
  Berlin, Technische Universität Berlin, Diss., 2014.
Santana, E., Brockmeier, A., and Principe, J. (2014). Joint optimization of algorithmic suites for
  EEG analysis. In 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
  and Biology Society (EMBC), pages 2997–3000.

Schack, B., Vath, N., Petsche, H., Geissler, H.-G., and Möller, E. (2002). Phase-coupling of
  theta–gamma EEG rhythms during short-term memory processing. International Journal of Psy-
  chophysiology, 44(2):143–163.
Schalk, G., McFarland, D. J., Hinterberger, T., Birbaumer, N., and Wolpaw, J. R. (2004). BCI2000:
  a general-purpose brain-computer interface (BCI) system. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
  Engineering, 51(6):1034–1043.
Schmidhuber, J. (2015). Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview. Neural Networks, 61:85–
  117. arXiv: 1404.7828.
Sercu, T., Puhrsch, C., Kingsbury, B., and LeCun, Y. (2016). Very deep multilingual convolutional
  neural networks for LVCSR. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 4955–4959.
Sermanet, P., Eigen, D., Zhang, X., Mathieu, M., Fergus, R., and LeCun, Y. (2014). OverFeat: In-
  tegrated Recognition, Localization and Detection using Convolutional Networks. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2014). arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6229.

Shamwell, J., Lee, H., Kwon, H., Marathe, A. R., Lawhern, V., and Nothwang, W. (2016). Single-
  trial EEG RSVP classification using convolutional neural networks. In George, T., Dutta, A. K.,
  and Islam, M. S., editors, SPIE Defense+ Security, volume 9836. International Society for Optics
  and Photonics.



                                               41
Tonio Ball                                                                           REFERENCES


Shelhamer, E., Long, J., and Darrell, T. (2016). Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Seg-
  mentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, PP(99):1–1.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser,
   J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S., Grewe, D., Nham, J., Kalch-
   brenner, N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap, T., Leach, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T., and Hass-
   abis, D. (2016). Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature,
   529(7587):484–489.
Springenberg, J. T., Klein, A., Falkner, S., and Hutter, F. (2016). Bayesian Optimization with
  Robust Bayesian Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
  4134–4142.

Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Dropout:
  A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 15(1):1929–1958.
Stansbury, D. E., Naselaris, T., and Gallant, J. L. (2013). Natural Scene Statistics Account for the
  Representation of Scene Categories in Human Visual Cortex. Neuron, 79(5):1025–1034.

Stober, S. (2016). Learning Discriminative Features from Electroencephalography Recordings by
  Encoding Similarity Constraints. In Bernstein Conference 2016.
Stober, S., Cameron, D. J., and Grahn, J. A. (2014). Using Convolutional Neural Networks to
  Recognize Rhythm Stimuli from Electroencephalography Recordings. In Proceedings of the 27th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’14, pages 1449–1457,
  Cambridge, MA, USA. MIT Press.
Sturm, I., Lapuschkin, S., Samek, W., and Müller, K.-R. (2016). Interpretable deep neural networks
  for single-trial EEG classification. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 274:141–145.
Sun, G., Hu, J., and Wu, G. (2010). A novel frequency band selection method for Common Spatial
  Pattern in Motor Imagery based Brain Computer Interface.
Sun, X., Qian, C., Chen, Z., Wu, Z., Luo, B., and Pan, G. (2016). Remembered or Forgotten?—An
  EEG-Based Computational Prediction Approach. PLOS ONE, 11(12):e0167497.
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., and Wojna, Z. (2015). Rethinking the inception
  architecture for computer vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.00567.
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I., and Fergus, R. (2014).
  Intriguing properties of neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Tabar, Y. R. and Halici, U. (2017). A novel deep learning approach for classification of EEG motor
  imagery signals. Journal of Neural Engineering, 14(1):016003.

Tang, Z., Li, C., and Sun, S. (2017). Single-trial EEG classification of motor imagery using deep con-
  volutional neural networks. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics, 130:11–18.




                                                 42
Tonio Ball                                                                              REFERENCES


Tangermann, M., Müller, K.-R., Aertsen, A., Birbaumer, N., Braun, C., Brunner, C., Leeb, R.,
  Mehring, C., Miller, K. J., Müller-Putz, G. R., Nolte, G., Pfurtscheller, G., Preissl, H., Schalk, G.,
  Schlögl, A., Vidaurre, C., Waldert, S., and Blankertz, B. (2012). Review of the BCI Competition
  IV. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 6.
Thodoroff, P., Pineau, J., and Lim, A. (2016). Learning Robust Features using Deep Learning for
  Automatic Seizure Detection. In JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, volume 56.
Tonin, L., Carlson, T., Leeb, R., and Millán, J. d. R. (2011). Brain-controlled telepresence robot
  by motor-disabled people. In 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
  Medicine and Biology Society, pages 4227–4230.

Toro, C., Deuschl, G., Thatcher, R., Sato, S., Kufta, C., and Hallett, M. (1994). Event-related
  desynchronization and movement-related cortical potentials on the ECoG and EEG. Electroen-
  cephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 93(5):380–389.
Vanhatalo, S., Palva, J. M., Holmes, M. D., Miller, J. W., Voipio, J., and Kaila, K. (2004). Infraslow
  oscillations modulate excitability and interictal epileptic activity in the human cortex during sleep.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101(14):5053–
  5057.
Venthur, B., Dähne, S., Höhne, J., Heller, H., and Blankertz, B. (2015). Wyrm: A Brain-Computer
  Interface Toolbox in Python. Neuroinformatics, pages 1–16.
Wang, Z., Lyu, S., Schalk, G., and Ji, Q. (2013). Deep Feature Learning Using Target Priors with
 Applications in ECoG Signal Decoding for BCI. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third International
 Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI ’13, pages 1785–1791, Beijing, China. AAAI
 Press.
Wilcoxon, F. (1945). Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods. Biometrics Bulletin, 1(6):80–83.

Yang, H., Sakhavi, S., Ang, K. K., and Guan, C. (2015). On the use of convolutional neural
  networks and augmented CSP features for multi-class motor imagery of EEG signals classification.
  Conference proceedings: ... Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
  and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Annual Conference,
  2015:2620–2623.

Yeager, L. (2016). Effective Visualizations for Training and Evaluating Deep Models.




                                                   43
     A      Supplementary Materials




                                                                                                                                                                                                Tonio Ball
     A.1     Related Work


      Study                           Decoding            Input     Conv/        Design                 Training              External       Visualization Visualization findings
                                      problem             do-       dense lay-   choices                strategies            baseline       type(s)
                                                          main      ers

      This manuscript, Schirrmeis-    Imagined and        Time,     5/1          Different  Conv-       Trial-wise   vs.      FBCSP      +   Feature activa-     See Section 3.4
      ter et. al (2017)               executed move-      0–125                  Net architectures      cropped training      rLDA           tion correlation
                                      ment    classes,    Hz                                            strategy                                                 Non-
                                      within subject                             linearities      and                                        perturbation
                                                                                 pooling        modes                                        prediction
                                                                                                                                             correlation         Reg-
                                                                                 ularization  and
                                                                                 intermediate nor-
                                                                                 malization layers
                                                                                                                                                                 Fac-
                                                                                 torized         con-
                                                                                 volutions
44




                                                                                                                                                                 Split-
                                                                                 ted vs one-step
                                                                                 convolutions

      Single-trial EEG classifica-    Imagined move-      Time,     2/2
      tion of motor imagery us-       ment    classes,    8–30 Hz




                                                                                                                                                                                                A
      ing deep convolutional neu-     within-subject
      ral networks, Tang et al.




                                                                                                                                                                                                SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
      (2017)

      EEGNet: A Compact Con-          Oddball       re-   Time,     3/1          Kernel sizes
      volutional Network for EEG-     sponse (RSVP),      0.1–40
      based Brain-Computer Inter-     error response      Hz
      faces, Lawhern et al. (2016)    (ERN), move-
                                      ment     classes
                                      (voluntarily
                                      started      and
                                      imagined)

      Remembered or Forgotten?        Memory perfor-      Time,     2/2                                 Different time win-                  Weights     (spa-   Largest weights found over
      — An EEG-Based Computa-         mance, within-      0.05–15                                       dows                                 tial)               prefrontal and temporal cor-
      tional Prediction Approach,     subject             Hz                                                                                                     tex
      Sun et al. (2016)

      Multimodal Neural Network       Oddball       re-   Time,     3/2                                                                      Weights             Weights    showed     typi-
      for Rapid Serial Visual         sponse     using    0.3–20                                                                                                 cal   P300     distribution
      Presentation Brain Com-         RSVP and im-        Hz                                                                                 tivations
      puter Interface, Manor et al.   age (combined                                                                                                              tivations   were   high  at
      (2016)                          image-EEG                                                                                                                  plausible times (300-500ms)
                                      decoding),                                                                                             maps by gradi-
                                      within-subject                                                                                         ent
                                                                                                                                                                 maps     showed    plausible
                                                                                                                                                                 spatio-temporal plots
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Tonio Ball
     Study                            Decoding           Input      Conv/            Design              Training             External       Visualization Visualization findings
                                      problem            do-        dense lay-       choices             strategies           baseline       type(s)
                                                         main       ers

     A novel deep learning ap-        Imagined and       Frequency, 1/1              Addition of six-layer stacked au-        FBCSP,         Weights (spa-       Some weights represented
     proach for classification of     executed move-     6–30 Hz                     toencoder  on    ConvNet   features      Twin    SVM,   tial + frequen-     difference of values of two
     EEG motor imagery signals,       ment    classes,                                                                        DDFBS, Bi-     tial)               Ker-
                                                                                                                                                                 electrodes on different sides
     Tabar and Halici (2017)          within-subject                                 nel sizes                                spectrum,                          of head
                                                                                                                              RQNN

     Predicting Seizures from         Seizure predic-    Frequency, 1/2                                  Different     sub-                  Weights             Clusters of weights showed
     Electroencephalography           tion,   within-    0–200                                           divisions       of                                      typical frequency band sub-
     Recordings: A Knowledge          subject            Hz                                              frequency    range                  tering         of   division (delta, theta, alpha,
     Transfer Strategy,   Liang                                                                                                              weights             beta, gamma)            Dif-
     et al. (2016)                                                                                       ferent     lengths
                                                                                                         of    time   crops
                                                                                                                                                                                        Trans-
                                                                                                         fer learning with
                                                                                                         auxiliary     non-
                                                                                                         epilepsy datasets

     EEG-based prediction of          Driver      per-   Time,      1/3              Replacement of convolutional layers by
     driver’s cognitive perfor-       formance,          1–50 Hz                     restricted Boltzmann machines with
     mance by deep convolutional      within-     and                                slightly varied network architecture
45




     neural network, Hajinoroozi      cross-subject
     et al. (2016)

     Deep learning for epileptic      Epileptic          Time,      1–2/2            1 or 2 convolu-                                         Weights             Weights increasingly cor-
     intracranial EEG data, An-       discharges,        0–100                       tional layers                                                               related with IED wave-
     toniades et al. (2016)           cross-subject      HZ                                                                                  relation weights    forms    with     increasing




                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                             and    interictal   number of training iterations
                                                                                                                                             epileptic    dis-




                                                                                                                                                                                                  SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
                                                                                                                                             charges (IED)       ond       layer     captured
                                                                                                                                                                 more        complex      and
                                                                                                                                             tivations           well-defined        epileptic
                                                                                                                                                                 shapes than first layer

                                                                                                                                                                 led to highly synchronized
                                                                                                                                                                 activations for neighbouring
                                                                                                                                                                 electrodes

     Learning Robust Features         Start of epilep-   Frequency, 3/1 (+ LSTM                                               Hand crafted   Input     occlu-    Allowed to locate areas criti-
     using Deep Learning for Au-      tic     seizure,   mean       as postproces-                                            features   +   sion and effect     cal for seizure
     tomatic Seizure Detection,       within-     and    ampli-     sor)                                                      SVM            on    prediction
     Thodoroff et al. (2016)          cross-subject      tude for                                                                            accuracy
                                                         0–7 Hz,
                                                         7–14 Hz,
                                                         14–49
                                                         Hz

     Single-trial EEG RSVP clas-      Oddball    re-     Time,      4/3                                                                      Weights     (spa-   Some filter     weights had
     sification using convolutional   sponse (RSVP),     0.5–50                                                                              tial)               expected         topographic
     neural networks, Shamwell        groupwise          Hz                                                                                                      distributions    for   P300
     et al. (2016)                    (ConvNet
                                      trained on all                                                                                                             ers filters had large weights
                                      subjects)                                                                                                                  on areas not traditionally
                                                                                                                                                                 associated with P300
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tonio Ball
     Study                           Decoding           Input        Conv/             Design                Training               External        Visualization Visualization findings
                                     problem            do-          dense lay-        choices               strategies             baseline        type(s)
                                                        main         ers

     Wearable seizure detection      Seizure detec-     Time,        1-3/1-3                                 Cross-subject su-      Multiple:
     using convolutional neural      tion,     cross-   0–128                                                pervised training,     spectral
     networks with transfer learn-   subject, within-   Hz                                                   within-subject         features,
     ing, Page et al. (2016)         subject, group-                                                         finetuning of fully    higher order
                                     wise                                                                    connected layers       statistics  +
                                                                                                                                    linear-SVM,
                                                                                                                                    RBF-SVM, ...

     Learning      Representations   Cognitive load     Frequency,   3–7/2       (+    Number of con-                                               Inputs      that    Different filters        were
     from     EEG    with    Deep    (number       of   mean         LSTM         or   volutional layers                                            maximally acti-     sensitive  to           differ-
     Recurrent-Convolutional         characters    to   power        other     tem-                                                                 vate given filter   Tem- frequency
                                                                                                                                                                        ent                     bands
     Neural Networks, Bashivan       memorize),         for 4–7      poral     post-   poral processing of
     et al. (2016)                   cross-subject      Hz, 8–       processing        ConvNet     output                                           tivations     of    layers   had    more    spa-
                                                        13 Hz,       (see    design    by max pooling,                                              these     inputs    tially localized activations
                                                        13–30        choices))         temporal    convo-
                                                        Hz                             lution, LSTM or                                              convolution”        features had noticeable links
                                                                                       temporal convolu-                                            for these inputs    to well-known electrophysio-
                                                                                       tion + LSTM                                                                      logical markers of cognitive
                                                                                                                                                                        load
46




     Deep Feature Learning for       Type of music      Time,        2/1               Kernel sizes          Pretraining    first                   Weights             Different constraints led to
     EEG Recordings,    Stober       rhythm, group-     0.5–                                                 layer as convolu-                      (spatial+3          different weights, one type
     (2016)                          wise (ensembles    30Hz                                                 tional autoencoder                     timesteps,          of constraints could enforce
                                     of    leave-one-                                                        with      different                    pretrained   as     weights that are similar
                                     subject-out                                                             constraints                            autoencoder)        across subjects; other type
                                     trained models,                                                                                                                    of constraints led to weights




                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                     evaluated     on                                                                                                                   that have similar spatial
                                     separate    test                                                                                                                   topographies under different




                                                                                                                                                                                                          SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
                                     set   of   same                                                                                                                    architectural configurations
                                     subjects)                                                                                                                          and preprocessings

     Convolutional Neural Net-       Oddball      re-   Time,        3/3 (Spatio-                                                                   Weights             Spatiotemporal     reg-
     work for Multi-Category         sponse (RSVP),     0.1–50       temporal                                                                                           ularization    led   to
     Rapid Serial Visual Presen-     within-subject     Hz           regulariza-                                                                    and single-trial    softer peaks in weights
     tation BCI, Manor and Geva                                      tion)                                                                          activations
     (2015)                                                                                                                                                             tial   weights   showed typ-
                                                                                                                                                                        ical     P300      distribution

                                                                                                                                                                        tivations mostly had peaks
                                                                                                                                                                        at typical times (300-400ms)

     Parallel      Convolutional-    Imagined move-     Frequency,   2/2     (Final    Combination
     Linear     Neural  Network      ment    classes,   4–40 Hz,     fully     con-    ConvNet        and
     for Motor Imagery Clas-         within-subject     using        nected   layer    MLP (trained on
     sification, Sakhavi et al.                         FBCSP        uses      con-    different features)
     (2015)                                                          catenated         vs. only ConvNet
                                                                     output      by    vs. only MLP
                                                                     convolutional
                                                                     and       fully
                                                                     connected
                                                                     layers)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tonio Ball
       Study                          Decoding            Input       Conv/              Design                   Training              External       Visualization Visualization findings
                                      problem             do-         dense lay-         choices                  strategies            baseline       type(s)
                                                          main        ers

       Using Convolutional Neu-       Type of music       Time        1-2/1              Best values from         Best values from
       ral networks to Recognize      rhythm, within-     and fre-                       automatic       hy-      automatic      hy-
       Rhythm Stimuli form Elec-      subject             quency                         perparameter             perparameter
       troencephalography Record-                         evalu-                         optimization:            optimization:
       ings, Stober et al. (2014)                         ated,                          frequency cutoff,        learning      rate,
                                                          0-200                          one vs two layers,       learning rate de-
                                                          Hz                             kernel sizes, num-       cay,   momentum,
                                                                                         ber of channels,         final momentum
                                                                                         pooling width

       Convolutional deep belief      Imagined move-      Frequency, 2/0       (Con-
       networks for feature extrac-   ment    classes,    8–30 Hz    volutional
       tion of EEG signal, Ren and    within-subject                 deep       belief
       Wu (2014)                                                     network, sepa-
                                                                     rately trained
                                                                     RBF-SVM
                                                                     classifier)

       Deep feature learning using    Finger      flex-   Time,       3/1      (Con-     Partially      super-
       target priors with applica-    ion trajectory      0.15–       volutional         vised CSA
       tions in ECoG signal decod-    (regression),       200         layers trained
47




       ing for BCI, Wang et al.       within-subject      Hz          as     convolu-
       (2013)                                                         tional stacked
                                                                      autoencoder
                                                                      with     target
                                                                      prior)




                                                                                                                                                                                                    A
       Convolutional neural net-      Oddball         /   Time,       2/2                Electrode subset                               Multiple:      Weights       Spatial filters were similar
       works for P300 detection       attention     re-   0.1-20                         (fixed or automat-                             Linear SVM,                  for different architectures




                                                                                                                                                                                                    SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
       with application to brain-     sponse     using    Hz                             ically determined)                             gradient
       computer interfaces, Cecotti   P300     speller,                                                                                 boosting, E-                 Us- filters were different
                                                                                                                                                                     tial
       and Graser (2011)              within-subject                                     ing     only      one                          SVM, S-SVM,                  (more focal, more diffuse)
                                                                                         spatial         filter                         mLVQ, LDA,                   for different subjects
                                                                                                                                        ...                          Dif-
                                                                                         ferent ensembling
                                                                                         strategies

     Table S1: Related previous publications using convolutional neural networks for EEG decoding. Frequency domain input always only contains amplitudes
     or a transformation of amplitudes (power, log power, etc.), never phase information. The number of dense layers includes parametrized classification layers. Layer
     numbers always refer to EEG decoding models in cases of articles that use multiple modalities for decoding. Special features of the model written in parentheses after
     the number of layers, especially if these features make the number of layers misleading. External baseline: the study includes directly comparable baseline accuracies of
     non-deep-learning approaches of other authors. Visualization types and findings both refer to visualizations of the trained networks used for EEG decoding; findings are
     paraphrased from the original publications. Note that none of the previous studies using time-domain input showed, using a suitable visualization technique, that the
     ConvNets learned to use band power features, in contrast to our present study. Also note that other previous studies used artificial neural networks without convolutions
     for EEG analysis, e.g. Santana et al. (2014); Sturm et al. (2016).
Tonio Ball                                                    A   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS


A.2     FBCSP implementation
As in many previous studies (Lotte et al., 2007), we used regularized linear discriminant analysis
(RLDA) as the classifier, with shrinkage regularization (Ledoit and Wolf, 2004). To decode multiple
classes, we used one-vs-one majority weighted voting: We trained an RLDA classifier for each pair
of classes, summed the classifier outputs (scaled to be in the same range) across classes and picked
the class with the highest sum (Chin et al., 2009; Galar et al., 2011).
     FBCSP is typically used with feature selection, since few spatial filters from few frequency bands
often suffice to reach good accuracies and using many or even all spatial filters often leads to over-
fitting (Blankertz et al., 2008; Chin et al., 2009). We use a classical measure for preselecting spatial
filters, the ratio of the corresponding power features for both classes extracted by each spatial filter
(Blankertz et al., 2008). Additionally, we performed a feature selection step on the final filter bank
features by selecting features using an inner cross validation on the training set, see published code
1
   for details.
     In the present study, we designed two filter banks adapted for the two datasets to capture
most discriminative motor-related band power information. In preliminary experiments, overlapping
frequency bands led to higher accuracies, as also proposed by Sun et al. (2010). As the bandwidth
of physiological EEG power modulations typically increases in higher frequency ranges (Buzsáki and
Draguhn, 2004), we used frequency bands with 6 Hz width and 3 Hz overlap in frequencies up to 13
Hz, and bands of 8 Hz width and 4 Hz overlap in the range above 10 Hz. Frequencies above 38 Hz
only improved accuracies on one of our datasets, the so-called High-Gamma Dataset (see Section 2.7,
where we also describe the likely reason for this difference, namely that the recording procedure for
the High-Gamma Dataset — but not for the BCI Competition Dataset — was specifically optimized
for the high frequency range). Hence the upper limit of used frequencies was set at 38 Hz for the
BCI Competition Dataset, while the upper limit for the High-Gamma Dataset was set to 122 Hz,
close to the Nyquist frequency, thus allowing FBCSP to also use information from the gamma band.
     As a sanity check, we compared the accuracies of our FBCSP implementation to those published
in the literature for the same BCI Competition Dataset (Sakhavi et al., 2015), showing very similar
performance: 67.59% for our implementation vs 67.01% for their implementation on average across
subjects (p>0.7, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, see Result 1 for more detailed results). This underlines
that our FBCSP implementation, including our feature selection and filter bank design, indeed was
a suitable baseline for the evaluation of our ConvNet decoding accuracies.

A.3     Residual network architecture
In total, the ResNet has 31 convolutional layers, a depth where ConvNets without residual blocks
started to show problems converging in the original ResNet paper (He et al., 2015). In layers where
the number of channels is increased, we padded the incoming feature map with zeros to match the
new channel dimensionality for the shortcut, as in option A of the original paper (He et al., 2015).
   1 https://github.com/robintibor/braindecode/blob/f9497f96a6dfdea1e24a4709a9ceb30e0f4768e3/

braindecode/csp/pipeline.py#L200-L408




                                                  48
Tonio Ball                                                     A   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS


           Layer/Block             Number of Kernels         Kernel Size        Output Size
           Input                                                                1000x44x1
           Convolution (linear)    48                        3x1                1000x44x48
           Convolution (ELU)       48                        1x44               1000x1x48
           ResBlock (ELU)          48                        3x1
           ResBlock (ELU)          48                        3x1
           ResBlock (ELU)          96                        3x1 (Stride 2x1)   500x1x96
           ResBlock (ELU)          96                        3x1
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1 (Stride 2x1)   250x1x96
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1 (Stride 2x1)   125x1x96
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1 (Stride 2x1)   63x1x96
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1 (Stride 2x1)   32x1x96
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1 (Stride 2x1)   16x1x96
           ResBlock (ELU)          144                       3x1
           Mean Pooling                                      10x1               7x1x144
           Convolution + Softmax   4                         1x1                7x1x4



Table S2: Residual network architecture hyperparameters. Number of kernels, kernel and
output size for all subparts of the network. Output size is always time x height x channels. Note
that channels here refers to input channels of a network layer, not to EEG channels; EEG channels
are in the height dimension. Output size is only shown if it changes from the previous block. Second
convolution and all residual blocks used ELU nonlinearities. Note that in the end we had seven
outputs, i.e., predictions for the four classes, in the time dimension ( 7x1x4 final output size). In
practice, when using cropped training as explained in Section 2.5.4, we even had 424 predictions,
and used the mean of these to predict the trial.


A.4     Optimization and early stopping
Adam is a variant of stochastic gradient descent designed to work well with high-dimensional param-
eters, which makes it suitable for optimizing the large number of parameters of a ConvNet (Kingma
and Ba, 2014). The early stopping strategy that we use throughout this study, developed in the
computer vision field 2 , splits the training set into a training and validation fold and stops the first
phase of the training when validation accuracy does not improve for a predefined number of epochs.
The training continues on the combined training and validation fold starting from the parameter
values that led to the best accuracies on the validation fold so far. The training ends when the loss
function on the validation fold drops to the same value as the loss function on the training fold at
the end of the first training phase (we do not continue training in a third phase as in the original
description). Early stopping in general allows training on different types of networks and datasets
without choosing the number of training epochs by hand. Our specific strategy uses the entire train-
ing data while only training once. In our study, all reported accuracies have been determined on an
independent test set.
  2 https://web.archive.org/web/20160809230156/https://code.google.com/p/cuda-convnet/wiki/Methodology




                                                   49
Tonio Ball                                                      A   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS


A.5     Visualization methods
A.5.1    Input-feature unit-output correlation maps
The input-feature unit-output correlation maps visualize the frequency-resolved correlation between
unit outputs of the convolutional filters of the ConvNets and the power of all the samples in the
receptive field of these units (see Figure S1).
   To achieve this,we performed the following steps:

   1. For each frequency band of interest, the signal was bandpass-filtered to that frequency band
      and the envelope was computed.
   2. For each frequency band of interest, the squared mean envelope for each receptive field of a
      given layer was computed. We did this by computing a moving window average of the squared
      envelope with the moving window size the same as the receptive field size (this was the input
      feature for which we then evaluated how much it affected the unit output).
   3. Unit outputs of the given layer on the original signal were computed.
   4. Linear correlations between the squared mean envelope values for all the frequency bands and
      the unit outputs for each convolutional filter were computed. These correlations should reflect
      whether a filter might compute an approximation of the squared mean envelope of all the
      samples in its receptive field.

Since we compute correlations after concatenating all samples of all trials, these correlations reflect
both within-trial and between-trial effects. The proposed method could, however, be straightfor-
wardly extended to disentangle these two sources. We computed the correlations for a filter bank
ranging from 0 to 119 Hz. An example result for a single electrode and a single subject is shown in
Figure S2.
    To compute a single scalp plot for a frequency band, we computed the mean of the absolute
correlations over all units for each convolutional filter and each electrode for that frequency band.
To disentangle effects which are caused by the training of the network from those caused by the
architecture, we computed the scalp plot for a trained and an untrained model. The scalp plot for a
subject is then the scalp plot of the trained model minus the scalp plot of the untrained model (see
Figure S1b). The group scalp plot is the mean of these differential scalp plots over all subjects.
    To compare the resulting maps against scalp maps that simply result from class-feature cor-
relations, we also computed the linear correlation between mean squared envelope values and the
one-hot-encoded classes, in the same way as before. First, for each trial, each sensor and each fre-
quency band, we constructed a vector of the moving window squared envelope values as before (with
the moving window now the size of the receptive field of the last layer of the ConvNet). Second, for
each trial and each class, we constructed a vector of either value 1 if the trial was of the given class or
value 0 if it was of another class. The concatenated vectors then resulted in a time series with value
1 if the time point belonged to a given class and value 0 if it did not. Then we correlated the mov-
ing window squared envelope time series vectors with the class time series vectors, resulting in one
correlation value per class, sensor and frequency band combination. As in the other computations,
we subtracted the correlations resulting from predictions of an untrained deep ConvNet.
    A further question is whether the correlations could be a result of the unit outputs encoding the
final class label. Such correlations could also result from using other discriminative features than
the features we analyzed. To investigate this question, we correlated the unit outputs for each layer


                                                    50
Tonio Ball                                                                   A      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS




                                                                                                                                           of squared envelope
                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                unit output moving average
   fgamma




                                                                                                                               Standardized Standardized
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                           1
      fbeta                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                               1
     falpha                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                           3
  Filter 1                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                           1
  Filter 2                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                               1
  Filter 3                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                               3
                Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3 Trial 4 Trial 5 Trial 6 Trial 7 Trial 8 Trial 9 Trial 10
(a) Feature inputs and unit outputs for input-feature unit-output correlation map. Moving average of squared envelopes and
unit outputs for 10 trials. Upper rows show mean squared envelopes over the receptive field for three frequency ranges in the
alpha, beta and gamma frequency band, standardized per frequency range. Lower rows show corresponding unit outputs for
three filters, standardized per filter. All time series standardized for the visualization.

                                                                                                                  falpha
              Input­feature unit­output            Mean of absolute correlation
                      correlation                          over filters
               Trained            Untrained           Trained UntrainedDifference    0.8

                                                                                        Correlation coefficient
                                                                                     0.6
 fgamma                                                                              0.4
                                                                                     0.2
   fbeta                                                                             0.0
                                                                                      0.2
  falpha                                                                              0.4
           Filte Filte Filte   Filte Filte Filte                                      0.6
                r1 r2 r3            r1 r2 r3                                          0.8

(b) Input-feature unit-output correlations and corresponding scalp map for the alpha band. Left: Correlation coefficients
between unit outputs of three filters and mean squared envelope values over the corresponding receptive field of the units
for three frequency ranges in the alpha (7–13 Hz), beta (13–31 Hz), and gamma (71–91 Hz) frequency band. Results are
shown for the trained and the untrained ConvNet and for one electrode. Middle: Mean of the absolute correlation coefficients
over the three filters for the trained and the untrained ConvNet, and the difference between trained and untrained ConvNet.
Right: An exemplary scalp map for correlations in the alpha band (7–13 Hz), where the color of each dot encodes the
correlation difference between a trained and an untrained ConvNet for one electrode. Note localized positive effects above
areas corresponding to the right and left sensorimotor hand/arm areas, indicating that activity in these areas has large
absolute correlations with the predictions of the trained ConvNet.

Figure S1:           Computation overview for input-feature unit-output network correlation
map.




                                                               51
Tonio Ball                                                                                      A   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS


         0.60                                                                                                                          Trained
                                                               105                                        105                          Untrained
         0.45                                                                                                                          Difference
                                                                90                                         90


                Correlation coefficient
         0.30




                                              Frequency [Hz]
                                                                75                                         75
         0.15
                                                                60                                         60
         0.00
                                                                45                                         45
          0.15
                                                                30                                         30
          0.30
          0.45                            sorted by 15                                                     15

          0.60                                                   0                                          0
                                                                     0   50    100        150       200         0.1 0.0   0.1    0.2      0.3   0.4
                                                                              Filter                                Correlation coefficient

Figure S2: Correlation between the mean squared envelope feature and unit output for
a single subject at one electrode position (FCC4h). Left: All correlations. Colors indicate
the correlation between unit outputs per convolutional filter (x-axis) and mean squared envelope in
different frequency bands (y-axis). Filters are sorted by their correlation to the 7–13 Hz envelope
(outlined by the black rectangle). Note the large correlations/anti-correlations in the alpha/beta
bands (7–31 Hz) and somewhat weaker correlations/anti-correlations in the gamma band (around
75 Hz). Right: Mean absolute values across units of all convolutional filters for all correlation
coefficients of the trained model, the untrained model and the difference between the trained and
untrained model. Peaks in the alpha, beta and gamma bands are clearly visible.


with the class labels. Here, we proceeded the same way as described in the previous paragraph, but
correlated unit outputs directly with class labels. We then computed a single absolute correlation
coefficient per layer in two ways: First, we computed the mean absolute correlation coefficient for
all classes and all filters. These correlations should show how strongly the unit outputs encode
the class labels on average across filters. Second, we computed the maximum absolute correlation
coefficients for each class over all filters and then computed the mean of these maxima of the four
classes. These correlations should show how strongly the unit outputs encode the class labels for
the most “class-informative” filters. Finally, for both versions and as in the other visualizations, we
also computed the difference of these correlations between a trained and an untrained model. In
summary, this approach allowed to show how unit-output class correlations arise from layer to layer
through the ConvNet.

A.5.2    Input-perturbation network-prediction correlation map
To investigate the causal effect of changes in power on the deep ConvNet, we correlated changes
in ConvNet predictions with changes in amplitudes by perturbing the original trial amplitudes (see
figure S3 for an overview). Concretely, we transformed all training trials into the frequency domain
by a Fourier transformation. Then we randomly perturbed the amplitudes by adding Gaussian noise
(with mean 0 and variance 1) to them. The phases were kept unperturbed. After the perturbation, we
re-transformed to the time domain by the inverse Fourier transformation. We computed predictions
of the deep ConvNet for these trials before and after the perturbation (predictions here refers to
outputs of the ConvNet directly before the softmax activation). We repeated this procedure with 400


                                                                                     52
Tonio Ball                                                                                                                                   A                         SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS




                              Frequency [Hz]



                                               125.0                                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Unit­output Log relative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    difference amplitude
Spectral Amplitude                              62.5                                                                                                                                                            0
      Perturbation
                                                 0.0                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
         Impact on Hand  (R)
          resulting HandFeet
                         (L)                                                                                                                                                                                    0
      classification   Rest                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                       Trial 1      Trial 2                    Trial 3         Trial 4     Trial 5    Trial 6                          Trial 7   Trial 8   Trial 9   Trial 10
(a) Example spectral amplitude perturbation and resulting classification difference. Top: Spectral amplitude perturbation
as used to perturb the trials. Bottom: unit-output difference between unperturbed and perturbed trials for the classification
layer units before the softmax.


             Mean correlation for
                                                                                                                                                                                  Alpha (Hand (R))
          400 amplitude perturbations
          120.0                                              0.04                                                                    0.024




                                                                                                                                             Correlation coefficient
          110.0                                                                               Gamma                                  0.018
                                                                    Correlation coefficient




          100.0                                              0.03
           90.0                                              0.02                                                                    0.012
           80.0                                                                                                                      0.006
           70.0                                              0.01
  Freqs




                                                                                                Beta                                 0.000
           60.0                                              0.00
           50.0
           40.0                                              0.01                                                                    0.006
           30.0                                              0.02                                                                    0.012
           20.0                                                                                Alpha
           10.0                                              0.03                                                                    0.018
            0.0
                         (L) d (R) Feet Rest                                                                  (L) d (R) Feet Rest
                    nd         n                                                                         nd         n
                  Ha        Ha                                                                         Ha        Ha

(b) Input-perturbation network-prediction correlations and corresponding network correlation scalp map for alpha band.
Left: Correlation coefficients between spectral amplitude perturbations for all frequency bins and differences of the unit
outputs for the four classes (differences between unperturbed and perturbed trials) for one electrode. Middle: Mean of the
correlation coefficients over the the alpha (7–13 Hz), beta (13–31 Hz) and gamma (71–91 Hz) frequency ranges. Right: An
exemplary scalp map for the alpha band, where the color of each dot encodes the correlation of amplitude changes at that
electrode and the corresponding prediction changes of the ConvNet. Negative correlations on the left sensorimotor hand/arm
areas show an amplitude decrease in these areas leads to a prediction increase for the Hand (R) class, whereas positive
correlations on the right sensorimotor hand/arm areas show an amplitude decrease leads to a prediction decrease for the
Hand (R) class. This complements the information from the input-feature unit-output network correlation map (see Figure
S1b), which showed band power in these areas is strongly correlated with unit outputs in the penultimate layer.

Figure S3: Computation overview for input-perturbation network-prediction correlation
map.




                                                                                                                         53
Tonio Ball                                                     A    SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS


perturbations sampled from aforementioned Gaussian distribution and then correlated the change in
input amplitudes (i.e., the perturbation/noise we added) with the change in the ConvNet predictions.
To ensure that the effects of our perturbations reflect the behavior of the ConvNet on realistic data,
we also checked that the perturbed input does not cause the ConvNet to misclassify the trials (as
can easily happen even from small perturbations, see Szegedy et al. (2014)). For that, we computed
accuracies on the perturbed trials. For all perturbations of the training sets of all subjects, accuracies
stayed above 99.5% of the accuracies achieved with the unperturbed data.

A.5.3    EEG spectral power topographies
To visualize the class-specific EEG spectral power modulations, we computed band-specific envelope-
class correlations in the alpha, beta and gamma bands for all classes of the High-Gamma Dataset.
The group-averaged topographies of these maps could be readily compared to our input-feature
unit-output network correlation maps, since, similar to the power-class correlation map described
in Section A.5.1, we computed correlations of the moving average of the squared envelope with the
actual class labels, using the receptive field size of the final layer as the moving average window size.
Since this is a ConvNet-independent visualization, we did not subtract any values of an untrained
ConvNet. We show the resulting scalp maps for the four classes and did not average over them.
Note that these computations were only used for the power topographies shown in Figure 11 and
did not enter the decoding analyses as described in the preceding sections.

A.6     Dataset details
The BCI Competition IV dataset 2a (from here on referred to as BCI Competition Dataset) is a
22-electrode EEG motor-imagery dataset, with 9 subjects and 2 sessions, each with 288 four-second
trials of imagined movements per subject (movements of the left hand, the right hand, the feet and
the tongue) (Brunner et al., 2008). The training set consists of the 288 trials of the first session, the
test set of the 288 trials of the second session.
    Our “High-Gamma Dataset” is a 128-electrode dataset (of which we later only use 44 sensors
covering the motor cortex, (see Section 2.7.1), obtained from 20 healthy subjects (9 female, 4 left-
handed, age 27.5±3.2 (mean±std)) with roughly 1000 (992±135.3, mean±std) four-second trials of
executed movements divided into 13 runs per subject. The four classes of movements were move-
ments of either the left hand, the right hand, both feet, and rest (no movement, but same type of
visual cue as for the other classes). The training set consists of the approx. 880 trials of all runs
except the last two runs, the test set of the approx. 160 trials of the last 2 runs. This dataset was
acquired in an EEG lab optimized for non-invasive detection of high-frequency movement-related
EEG components (Ball et al., 2008; Darvas et al., 2010). Such high-frequency components in the
range of approx. 60 to above 100 Hz are typically increased during movement execution and may
contain useful movement-related information (Crone et al., 1998; Hammer et al., 2016; Quandt et al.,
2012). Our technical EEG Setup comprised (1.) Active electromagnetic shielding: optimized for
frequencies from DC - 10 kHz (-30 dB to -50 dB), shielded window, ventilation & cable feedthrough
(mrShield, CFW EMV-Consulting AG, Reute, CH) (2.) Suitable amplifiers: high-resolution (24
bits/sample) and low-noise (<0.6 µV RMS 0.16–200 Hz, <1.5 µV RMS 0.16–3500 Hz), 5 kHz sam-
pling rate (NeurOne, Mega Electronics Ltd, Kuopio, FI) (3.) actively shielded EEG caps: 128
channels (WaveGuard Original, ANT, Enschede, NL) and (4.) full optical decoupling: All devices
are battery powered and communicate via optic fibers.



                                                   54
Tonio Ball                                                    A   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS


     Subjects sat in a comfortable armchair in the dimly lit Faraday cabin. The contact impedance
from electrodes to skin was typically reduced below 5 kOhm using electrolyte gel (SUPER-VISC,
EASYCAP GmbH, Herrsching, GER) and blunt cannulas. Visual cues were presented using a
monitor outside the cabin, visible through the shielded window. The distance between the display
and the subjects’ eyes was approx. 1 m. A fixation point was attached at the center of the screen.
The subjects were instructed to relax, fixate the fixation mark and to keep as still as possible during
the motor execution task. Blinking and swallowing was restricted to the inter-trial intervals.
     The tasks were as following. Depending on the direction of a gray arrow that was shown on
black background, the subjects had to repetitively clench their toes (downward arrow), perform
sequential finger-tapping of their left (leftward arrow) or right (rightward arrow) hand, or relax
(upward arrow). The movements were selected to require little proximal muscular activity while
still being complex enough to keep subjects involved. Within the 4-s trials, the subjects performed
the repetitive movements at their own pace, which had to be maintained as long as the arrow was
showing. Per run, 80 arrows were displayed for 4 s each, with 3 to 4 s of continuous random inter-trial
interval. The order of presentation was pseudo-randomized, with all four arrows being shown every
four trials. Ideally 13 runs were performed to collect 260 trials of each movement and rest. The
stimuli were presented and the data recorded with BCI2000 (Schalk et al., 2004). The experiment
was approved by the ethical committee of the University of Freiburg.

A.7     EEG preprocessing
We resampled the High-Gamma Dataset to 250 Hz, i.e., the same as the BCI Competition Dataset,
to be able to use the same ConvNet hyperparameter settings for both datasets. To ensure that the
ConvNets only have access to the same frequency range as the CSPs, we low-pass filtered the BCI
Competition Dataset to below 38 Hz. In case of the 4–fend -Hz dataset, we highpass-filtered the
signal as described in 2.7.1 ( for the BCI Competition Dataset, we bandpass-filtered to 4-38 Hz, so
the previous lowpass-filter step was merged with the highpass-filter step). Afterwards, for both sets,
for the ConvNets, we performed electrode-wise exponential moving standardization with a decay
factor of 0.999 to compute exponential moving means and variances for each channel and used these
to standardize the continuous data. Formally,
                                                     q
                                   x0 t = (xt − µt )/ σt2                                          (4)
                                  µt = 0.001xt + 0.999µt−1                                         (5)
                                  σt2 = 0.001(xt − µt )2 + 0.999σt−1
                                                                 2
                                                                                                   (6)

    where x0 t and xt are the standardized and the original signal for one electrode at time t, re-
spectively. As starting values for these recursive formulas we set the first 1000 mean values µt and
first 1000 variance values σt2 to the mean and the variance of the first 1000 samples, which were
always completely inside the training set (so we never used future test data in our preprocessing).
Some form of standardization is a commonly used procedure for ConvNets; exponentially moving
standardization has the advantage that it is also applicable for an online BCI. For FBCSP, this
standardization always worsened accuracies in preliminary experiments, so we did not use it. We
also did not use the standardization for our visualizations to ensure that the standardization does
not make our visualizations harder to interpret. Overall, the minimal preprocessing without any
manual feature extraction ensured our end-to-end pipeline could in principle be applied to a large
number of brain-signal decoding tasks.


                                                  55
Tonio Ball                                                    A   SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS


    We also only minimally cleaned the data sets to remove extreme high-amplitude recording arti-
facts. Our cleaning method thus only removed trials where at least one channel had a value outside
±800 µV . We kept trials with lower-amplitude artifacts as we assumed these trials might still contain
useful brain-signal information. As described below, we used visualization of the features learned by
the ConvNets to verify that they learned to classify brain signals and not artifacts. Furthermore,
for the High-Gamma Dataset, we used only those sensors covering the motor cortex: all central
electrodes (45), except the Cz electrode which served as the recording reference electrode. Interest-
ingly, using all electrodes led to worse accuracies for both the ConvNets and FBCSP, which may
be a useful insight for the design of future movement-related decoding/BCI studies. Any further
data restriction (trial-or channel-based cleaning) never led to accuracy increases in either of the
two methods when averaged across all subjects. For the visualizations, we used all electrodes and
common average re-referencing to investigate spatial distributions for the entire scalp.

A.8     Statistics
We used Wilcoxon signed-rank tests to check for statistical significance of the mean difference of
accuracies between decoding methods (Wilcoxon, 1945). We handled ties by using the average rank
of all tied data points and zero differences by assigning half of the rank-sum of these zero differences
to the positive rank-sums and the other half to the negative rank-sums. In case of a non-integer
test-statistic value caused by ties or zeros, we rounded our test-statistic to the next larger integer,
resulting in a more conservative estimate.

A.9     Software implementation and hardware
We performed the ConvNet experiments on Geforce GTX Titan Black GPUs with 6 GB memory.
The machines had Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-2650 v2 CPUs @ 2.60 GHz with 32 cores (which were never
fully used as most computations were performed on the GPU) and 128 GB RAM. FBCSP was
computed on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2650 v2 @ 2.60 GHz with 16 cores and 64 GB RAM.
We implemented our ConvNets using the Lasagne framework (Dieleman et al., 2015), preprocessing
of the data and FBCSP were implemented with the Wyrm library (Venthur et al., 2015). We will
make the code to reproduce these results publicly available.




                                                  56
