                                                                                                   www.nature.com/scientificreports




                OPEN             Stages prediction of Alzheimer’s
                                 disease with shallow 2D and 3D
                                 CNNs from intelligently selected
                                 neuroimaging data
                                 Jalees ur Rahman1, Muhammad Hanif1, Obaid ur Rehman2, Usman Haider3,
                                 Saeed Mian Qaisar4,5 & Paweł Pławiak6,7
                                 Detection of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is critical for successful diagnosis and treatment, involving the
                                 common practice of screening for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). However, the progressive nature
                                 of AD makes it challenging to identify its causal factors. Modern diagnostic workflows for AD use
                                 cognitive tests, neurological examinations, and biomarker-based methods, e.g., cerebrospinal fluid
                                 (CSF) analysis and positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. While these methods are effective,
                                 non-invasive imaging techniques like Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) are gaining importance. Deep
                                 Learning (DL) approaches for evaluating alterations in brain structure have focused on combining MRI
                                 and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) within the spatial architecture of DL. This combination
                                 has garnered significant research interest due to its remarkable effectiveness in automating feature
                                 extraction across various multilayer perceptron models. Despite this, MRI’s noisy and multidimensional
                                 nature requires an intelligent preprocessing pipeline for effective disease prediction. Our study aims
                                 to detect different stages of AD from the multidimensional neuroimaging data obtained through
                                 MRI scans using 2D and 3D CNN architectures. The proposed preprocessing pipeline comprises
                                 skull stripping, spatial normalization, and smoothing. It is followed by a novel and efficient pixel
                                 count-based frame selection and cropping approach, which renders a notable dimension reduction.
                                 Furthermore, the learnable resizer method is applied to enhance the image quality while resizing the
                                 data. Finally, the proposed shallow 2D and 3D CNN architectures extract spatio-temporal attributes
                                 from the segmented MRI data. Furthermore, we merged both the CNNs for further comparative
                                 analysis. Notably, 2D CNN achieved a maximum accuracy of 93%, while 3D CNN reported the highest
                                 accuracy of 96.5%.

                                 Keywords Alzheimer’s disease, Convolutional neural network, Deep learning, Frames selection, Learnable
                                 resizer, Magnetic resonance imaging, Multidimensional data, Preprocessing

                                 Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is an irretrievable, progressive, and chronic neurodegenerative disorder clinically
                                 expressed by cognitive dysfunction, amnesia, and steady loss of various brain functions and everyday living
                                 independent actions1. The number of AD patients is anticipated to grow worldwide from the existing 47 million
                                 to 152 million by the end of 2050, which causes far-reaching medical, social, and economic aftereffects2. The
                                 pathogenesis of AD remains unexplained, and the available therapies cannot cure it or stop its progression
                                 completely. AD detection by Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) screening is critical for successful care
                                 policies and actions to counter further disease deterioration. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) analyzes the
                                 structural changes in the brain caused by AD, Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), and Cognitively Normal (CN)

                                 1Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences and
                                 Technology, Topi, Pakistan. 2Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, University of Malaya,
                                 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 3Department of AI & DS, FAST School of Computing, National University of Computer
                                 and Emerging Sciences, Islamabad, Pakistan. 4College of Engineering and Technology, American University
                                 of the Middle East, Egaila, Kuwait. 5Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Effat University, 21478
                                 Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 6Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computer Science and Telecommunications,
                                 Cracow University of Technology, Warszawska 24, 31-155 Krakow, Poland. 7Institute of Theoretical and Applied
                                 Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Bałtycka 5, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland. email: saeed.qaisar@aum.edu.kw;
                                 plawiak@pk.edu.pl


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                            1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 manifestation. Neuroimaging helps in visualizing structural brain changes. Figure 1 demonstrates the brain
                                 changes where the ventricle enlargement and hippocampal size can be observed in the sample MRI images (AD
                                 brain with cortical atrophy is compared with the MRI image of MCI and CN). It is clear that the brain texture
                                 changes with the progression of AD disease (CN to MCI to AD).
                                     Neuroimaging biomarkers have been employed in earlier research to automatically predict various phases
                                 of AD or the progression of AD3–5. These investigations use MRI images heavily because of their affordable
                                 price and excellent resolution. The MRI images have been analyzed using a range of Machine Learning (ML)
                                 frameworks, including Random Forrest (RF), Boosting Techniques, and the Support Vector Machine (SVM), to
                                 identify AD6 automatically. However, current machine learning models typically require a deliberate selection
                                 of previously established brain Regions of Interest (ROI). These are predicated on the representations of known
                                 MRI features7,8. Additionally, a manual ROI assortment may contain subjective inaccuracies8. This is particularly
                                 the case when there is an insufficient understanding of the conclusive MRI biomarkers. In such scenarios, the
                                 pre-assorted ROIs are expected not to enclose all the potentially valuable indications to categorize the AD.
                                     Early detection of AD can lead to a proper cure. Several solutions have been presented in this context using the
                                 classical image processing approaches8,9, ML methods7, and the most advanced Deep Learning (DL) models4,5.
                                 Classical approaches are focused on the protein side detection of the disease, which is limited to detecting AD
                                 with high confidence9. On the other hand, ML methods are automated ways to detect AD with as high possible
                                 confidence and probability6as possible. A simple workflow for the detection of any disease, especially AD,
                                 consists of (i) data acquisition, (ii) data preprocessing, (iii) features selection or dimension reduction, (iv) model
                                 selection, (v) training, (vi) validation, (vii) testing, and (viii) evaluation. Traditional ML algorithms rely on
                                 information collected from the data rather than applying it to raw data, necessitating much work and extensive
                                 domain knowledge10. The selection of data features and information significantly impacts the classification
                                 framework’s accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, among other aspects. Moreover, the number of parameters in
                                 the ML methods is much higher, and single-subject neuroimaging data has millions of dimensions. On the other
                                 hand, the DL-based approaches take their cues directly from the input data. The handcrafted feature selection in
                                 ML is overcome by automated and self-learning-based feature selection with DL. The DL methods have multiple
                                 layers that can automate the feature extraction process by learning to turn the raw data into a more composite
                                 representation at each layer in a subsequent fashion5.
                                     Attention mechanisms are crucial in deep learning architectures, particularly in tasks involving sequential or
                                 spatial data. These mechanisms enable the model to selectively focus on specific parts of the input data, assigning
                                 varying degrees of importance to different elements11. In the case of medical imaging, the attention mechanisms
                                 can enhance the model’s ability to identify relevant features in a region-specific manner12. The mechanism has
                                 recently been used to detect AD from MRI modalities because MRI scans provide highly detailed and spatially
                                 complex information about the brain13–15. Attention mechanisms allow the model to focus on specific ROIs
                                 within the brain, potentially capturing subtle patterns or abnormalities associated with AD.
                                     The more cutting-edge approaches, including stacked auto-encoders (SAE)16, deep belief networks (DBNs)17,
                                 convolutional neural networks (CNNs)18, recurrent neural networks (RNNs)19, and so on, are characterized
                                 by deep learning. These techniques modify the data’s low-level properties to create an abstract or high-level
                                 representation of the learning systems16. In this20, a dual-tree complex wavelet transform-based approach is used
                                 to extract features from the input, after which a feed-forward neural network (FDNN) is used for classification.
                                 Convolutional layers make up the CNN, a deep multilayer artificial neural network (ANN) that enables a model
                                 to extract feature maps acquired from the product of inputs and kernels, enabling the detection of patterns.
                                 Additionally, CNNs have demonstrated excellent feature categorization accuracy21–23. Two types of CNN
                                 architectures for AD classification are 2D and 3D CNNs. Some studies have also focused on transfer learning-
                                 based pre-trained models to detect the disease, including VGG architectures24. The authors have used VGG-16
                                 to accurately classify brain MRI slices into CN, MCI, and AD in binary form. The maximum accuracy reported is
                                 for AD vs. CN, which is 98%. Similarly, AlexNet is used with transfer learning to detect the disease from healthy
                                 subjects with an accuracy of 95%25. These models are limited to the pre-trained shapes and sizes of the used
                                 models, while the size and structure of neuroimaging data can be changed from person to person.
                                     The majority of CNN designs are two-dimensional. CNN fared better in segmentation applications than
                                 other techniques like logistic regression and SVM for discrimination. It demonstrates that ML algorithms like
                                 SVM and logistic regression have lower inherent feature extraction capabilities26 than CNN. The detection of
                                 neurodegenerative illnesses has been shown by the Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) systems, which are based
                                 on CNNs27. 2D CNN architectures, such as ResNet and GoogleNet, have achieved vital distinctions between
                                 the CN AD and MCI21. The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) neuroimaging data produced
                                 highly discriminative features via ResNet-152 to detect stage (AD, MCI, and CN) progression. LeNet-5, an




                                 Fig. 1. Cross-sections from CN, MCI, and AD MRI images.


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                    2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 additional deep network and CNN architecture suggested18, separates the AD from the CN brain. Transfer
                                 learning and the VGG-16 pre-trained architecture were utilized28 to classify AD, MCI, and CN into many classes.
                                 Brain slices are classified into NC, MCI, and AD using a new 2D-CNN architecture29 that employs ResNet-50
                                 with distinct activations and batch normalization. To classify the AD stages, the SegNet is proposed30 to extract
                                 local information related to brain morphology. Resnet-101 executed AD, MCI, and CN classification. All the
                                 above studies have focused on the 2D architectures of CNN models. A main drawback of the 2D CNNs is they
                                 cannot detect the flow of structural changes in neuroimaging data.
                                     However, using brain MRI images, a 3D-CNN architecture created a classifier to distinguish between the CN
                                 and AD23. To reliably characterize the AD stages31, the authors have used 3D-ResNet-18 with data-augmented
                                 Resnet-18 for feature extraction. For the binary AD classification—CN vs. AD, CN vs. MCI, and AD vs. MCI—
                                 the ResNet-18 architecture is altered3132. The transfer learning technique is applied to three pre-trained CNNs,
                                 ResNet-18, ResNet-50, and ResNet-101, for MRI images’ three-way classification (AD, CN, MCI). Similarly,
                                 a different deep supervised adaptive 3D-CNN33 used 3D Convolutional autoencoder stacking to predict AD
                                 without removing the skull’s structural elements. Using the ADNI dataset, a probability-based CNN fusion34
                                 employed DenseNet to identify AD stages for identifying functional changes in the neuroimaging data. The
                                 3D Net-121 identified the AD phases with a 70% dropout rate. An ensemble of densely connected 3D-CNNs is
                                 proposed35 for the AD and MCI prediction to optimize the use of extracted data. The binary classification CNN
                                 topologies (AD/MCI or MCI/CN). More research needs to be done specifically on 3D CNN architectures.
                                     Deep learning techniques, particularly deep neural networks, have been widely used for AD detection in recent
                                 years. For example, Farooq et al. developed a deep CNN-based multi-class classification model for AD using
                                 MRI, achieving significant improvements in accuracy21. Likewise, Vision Transformers have been investigated
                                 for their potential in AD categorization task36. Zhang et al. proposed two models namely the Convolutional
                                 Voxel Vision Transformer (CVVT) and ConvNet3D-4 for a binary AD classification. They have shown that the
                                 devised methods provide advantages in capturing global context between voxels in an MRI scan36. It is shown
                                 that the CVVT and ConvNet3D-4 respectively secured 86% and 98% accuracy scores for the binary classification
                                 problem. The Optimized Vision Transformer for AD (OViTAD) further refines transformer architecture by
                                 reducing parameters and optimizing transformer input dimensions37. OViTAD handles rs-fMRI and sMRI,
                                 applying complex preprocessing techniques and a majority voting system for subject-level predictions. Despite
                                 achieving high accuracy, this method flattens 3D/4D data to 2D images, potentially losing spatial context, and
                                 remains computationally expensive due to the nature of transformer models.
                                     These aforementioned studies highlight the versatility of deep learning architectures across AD identification,
                                 paving the way for our approach to AD detection. In contrast, to previous works21,36, and37 our method
                                 emphasizes computational efficiency and task-specific optimization using shallow 2D and 3D CNNs. Our
                                 approach integrates domain-specific preprocessing steps, such as skull stripping, normalization, and frame
                                 selection, followed by a learnable resizer to optimize input frames dynamically. Unlike transformer-based
                                 methods, we do not rely on transfer learning or large-scale pretraining, making the model more adaptable and
                                 accessible for various clinical environments. Furthermore, our method preserves the 3D spatial structure of
                                 MRI data, improving feature extraction and maintaining contextual information critical for AD diagnosis. These
                                 differences highlight the practicality and versatility of our approach, particularly in scenarios where resources
                                 are limited or real-time inference is required.

                                 Contribution
                                 It is observed from the literature that researchers have focused on deep 2D CNN or 3D CNN for the automated
                                 identification of AD. Moreover, transfer learning is used for 2D CNN architectures to enhance the prediction
                                 performance and avoid the respective model’s overfitting. Transfer learning has a limitation in the unchangeable
                                 dimensions of the input data and hidden layers, which might not suit all cases. Similarly, 2D CNN architectures
                                 cannot detect the temporal changes in the structures of the neuroimaging data. The 3D CNNs are suitable
                                 for detecting the temporal and spatial structural changes in the MRI data. Still, these models have limited
                                 classification accuracy due to the high and dense dimensions of the data38.
                                      In contrast, our proposed approach introduces a statistically driven frame selection method that identifies
                                 the most informative slices from MRI data, reducing computational load while preserving critical information.
                                 Furthermore, the learnable resizer method is applied to the selected MRI data to enhance the image quality
                                 for deep learning models. Additionally, we design shallow 2D and 3D CNN architectures with significantly
                                 fewer parameters than traditional models, achieving competitive accuracy with enhanced efficiency. Compared
                                 to existing few-shot object detection models, our method achieves higher accuracy with a reduced parameter
                                 count, demonstrating the effectiveness of our frame selection and model design strategies.
                                      The primary contributions of this work are:

                                 • Devising an efficient frame selection and cropping-based dimensions reduction method. It statistically selects
                                   the most informative slices and segments based on the pixel count, ensuring that critical features are retained
                                   while reducing the computational cost and latency. Moreover, it diminishes the model’s overfitting and un-
                                   derfitting.
                                 • The selected frames are resized with the help of the learnable resizer instead of interpolation methods.
                                 • Achieving a 31.1% reduction in dataset size from preprocessed frames and a striking 92.65% reduction from
                                   raw data, highlighting its substantial efficiency for Deep Learning (DL) applications in AD detection.
                                 • Proposing the shallow 3D and 2D architectures rather than using the known CNN deep models to enhance
                                   the detection results of all the three stages of the AD, namely the CN, MCI, and AD.
                                 • We reduced the number of parameters by ~ 33% for 2D and ~ 85% for 3D CNNs, respectively, while maintain-
                                   ing comparable or better accuracy than their counterparts.


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                 3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 The functioning steps are:

                                     (i)	The ANDI dataset is used to test the method’s applicability. Each intended instance contains a sagittal,
                                          coronal, and transverse view.
                                    (ii)	Each intended image is pre-processed for enhancement and noise removal. This stage includes skull strip-
                                          ping, spatial normalization, smoothing, grey normalization, slicing, and resizing.
                                   (iii)	Efficient frame selection and cropping-based dimension reductions are done using a novel approach.
                                   (iv)	Resize the efficiently selected frames with the learnable resizer instead of using interpolation techniques.
                                    (v)	To keep the system computationally efficient, the 3D and 2D shallow CNN architectures are employed for
                                          automated categorization.
                                   (vi)	To avoid biases, multiple evaluation measures, accuracy, F1-score, precision, and recall are used to assess
                                          the classification performance.
                                  (vii)	As per the author’s best knowledge, the MRI multi-view imaging-based automated categorization of all
                                          the three stages of AD, the CN, MCI, and AD, is not carried out in the above-mentioned numerated man-
                                          ner.
                                 (viii)	The same dataset is comprehensively compared with recent state-of-the-art methods. The proposed meth-
                                          od achieves similar or better performance, demonstrating the technique’s dependability and resilience in
                                          detecting AD through MRI image processing.
                                   (ix)	The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section “Materials and methods” describes the materials and
                                          methods used. Section “Experiments and results” presents and discusses the experimental settings and
                                          findings. Finally, Section “Conclusion” concludes this paper.

                                 Materials and methods
                                 Figure 2 illustrates the overall flow of the proposed methodology. The raw MRI data undergoes initial preprocessing
                                 to eliminate noisy data. Since the number of frames in all three MRI views is relatively high, the most informative
                                 frames are selected using the proposed dimension reduction methods. The selected and cropped frames are
                                 passed through the learnable resizer method to improve image quality and reduce computational complexity.
                                 Finally, both 2D and 3D CNN architectures are introduced.

                                 Dataset
                                 The ADNI database provided the MRI data that were used in the investigation39,40. Three labels are included
                                 in the labeled ADNI dataset: moderate cognitive impairment (MCI), cognitive normal (CN), and Alzheimer’s
                                 disease (AD). The same patient appears across multiple visits within this dataset. Approximately 7,000 NIFTI
                                 files (3D MRI scans) are available. A selection of opinions is shown in Fig. 3. We have considered T1-weighted
                                 3-year data, which contains 2,182 NIFTI files. Each NIFTI file includes a subject’s sagittal, coronal, and transverse
                                 views. There are more than 250 sequenced frames/slices for all three views of the MRI data. It is clear from Fig. 3
                                 that the data is quite noisy. Therefore, the brain portion should be extracted from these images for further
                                 processing. Additionally, the distribution of the dataset by gender and label, along with statistics on age and
                                 number of visits, is as follows: CN: 748, MCI: 981, AD: 453, Male: 1,279, Female: 930, Average Age: 76.23,
                                 Standard Deviation of Age: 6.8, and Average Number of Visits per subject: 4.1.

                                 Preprocessing
                                 Preprocessing is one of the critical steps in medical imaging. The standard preprocessing pipeline of medical
                                 imaging includes the following:

                                 • Skull stripping.
                                 • Spatial normalization.
                                 • Smoothing.

                                 Using the default parameters of the CAT12 toolkit of the SPM12 toolbox (MATLAB third-party toolbox), the
                                 T1-Weighted MRI data from the ANDI in NIFTI format was preprocessed. Skull stripping, spatial normalizing,
                                 and smoothing are all part of the preprocessing pipeline, which results in MRI images that are all 3D and follow
                                 the dimensions of 121, 145, and 121, respectively, for X, Y, and Z with a spatial resolution of (1.5 × 1.5 × 1.5)
                                 mm3/voxel. Furthermore, every voxel value in an MRI image is normalized based on its signal intensity. The
                                 initial value is split by the MRI image’s real maximum value. The values obtained from this normalization fall
                                 between 0 and 1. Figure 4 displays the views that are produced following the preprocessing pipeline. Re-slicing
                                 was used to get the 3D-MRI (121 × 145 × 121), which is the total number of sagittal, coronal, and transverse views
                                 (145 × 121, 121 × 121, and 121 × 145, respectively). Following edge padding and zero filling, the dimensions of
                                 each 2D slice were adjusted to (145 × 145). Each 2D slice was squared after scaling. However, the reformatted
                                 MRI image’s central and spatial resolution remained unaltered. An explanation of the entire preprocessing
                                 pipeline is presented following.

                                 Skull stripping
                                 The skull stripping technique is an essential field of research for applications involving brain image processing.
                                 It speeds up and improves the precision of diagnosis in various medical applications. Therefore, it serves as
                                 an initial step. Brain scans are altered to remove non-cerebral structures such as the dura, scalp, and skull.
                                 The Adaptive Probability Region-Growing (APRG) method improves the probability maps41. Currently, this
                                 approach yields the most accurate and consistent results. This study used the APRG approach to extract the skull



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                   4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 2. The devised methodology.



                                 from MRI data. Given the deviations of ud and ld, the upper and lower thresholds are computed to find the
                                 membership region using (1) and (2).
                                                               Tupper = mgv (n) + [ud (n) . w + c (n)](1)

                                 While



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238              | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                         5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 3. Sample views of MRI images from the ADNI database.




                                 Fig. 4. MRI Preprocessed Views; (A) Sagittal Slice, (B) Coronal Slice, and (C) Transverse Slice.




                                 Algorithm. Generic windows size.



                                                                 Tlower = mgv (n) − [ld (n) . w + c (n)](2)

                                 Where n is the number of pixels used to compute the estimate.

                                 Spatial normalization
                                 Spatial normalization aims to modify human brain scans such that one position in a subject’s brain scan
                                 corresponds to the exact location in a different brain scan. This is because human brains differ in size and shape.
                                 To be more precise, pictures from various subjects need to be spatially converted so that they all live in the
                                 same coordinate system and that anatomically relevant regions are situated similarly. To facilitate comparisons
                                 between subjects with different brain morphologies, spatial normalization is a unique type of image registration
                                 that aligns an individual’s MRI image with a reference brain space. This study used the DARTEL42 recordings to


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                 6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 an existing spatial registration template; additionally, by choosing the first of six photos (iterations) of a DARTEL
                                 template, an optimal shooting strategy is used that uses an adaptive threshold and lower beginning resolutions
                                 to achieve a good balance between accuracy and calculation time.

                                 Smoothing
                                 Smoothing is utilized to eliminate the various noises from the MRI frames. The MRI data is sent through a
                                 Gaussian filter to cut down on noise. The finalized preprocessed frames of all three viewpoints are displayed in
                                 Fig. 2, which displays the images.
                                    Let I(x, y) represent the pixel’s intensity value in the input image at coordinates (x, y). Convolution of the
                                 input image with a Gaussian kernel, G(x, y), is the process of smoothing and it is mathematically given as:
                                                                                        ∑
                                                                                        ∞
                                                                                                ∑
                                                                                                ∞

                                                  IF ilter (x, y) = (I ∗ G) (x, y) =                  I (i, j) .G (x − i, y − j) .(3)
                                                                                       i=−∞ j=−∞


                                 In Eq. (2), * is the convolution operation. IFilter(x, y) is the smooth image and G(x, y) is given as:
                                                                                                          2   2
                                                                                      1         −
                                                                                                  x +y
                                                                    G (x, y) =               × e 2× σ 2 .(4)
                                                                                  2× π × σ 2


                                 In Eq. (4), σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution and in this study its vale is selected as 0.8.

                                 Dimension reduction
                                 Following preprocessing, each view of the MRI scans contains nearly 150 slices. Enough calculations are required
                                 to train a CNN model on these enormous slices/frames. Additionally, redundant data could lead to a CNN
                                 becoming overfit. To lower the overall computations per MRI image, each view’s frame count must be decreased.
                                 To address this problem, a recent study randomly selected 33 transverse, 50 coronal, and 40 sagittal slices—a
                                 total of 123 slices—of a subject’s three-dimensional brain image43.
                                     Since its unclear which frame has more information, the random selection of frames is not persuasive. Data
                                 loss due to random selection is a possibility. Based on the statistical analysis, the most relevant frames have been
                                 chosen for our research. First, the count of valid pixels is performed. A slice is eliminated, and the remaining
                                 frames are selected if they have fewer informative pixels than a threshold value. The following formula (5) can be
                                 used to determine the count of informative pixels.

                                                                                           Ñ0
                                                                              I =1−             .(5)
                                                                                        WF × HF

                                 Where WF is the frame’s height, HF is its width, and Ñ0 is the total number of zeros in the same frame. For this
                                 study, 16% of the most informative frames were selected from each view, ensuring optimal data representation.
                                 This resulted in a total of ~120 carefully chosen frames per patient across all views. Statistically chosen frames led
                                 to a decrease in MRI’s computational complexity. The instructive zone was varied in size in every single frame.
                                 By using the suggested algorithm, a generic average window size is determined for each patient and each of the
                                 three views (sagittal, coronal, and transverse):
                                     The resulting slices have significantly decreased the processing of the MRI files in terms of computing
                                 complexity. Figure 5 displays an example transverse view following slice cropping.

                                 Learnable resizer
                                 The learnable resizer is a critical component of the proposed preprocessing pipeline, integrated to optimize the
                                 preparation of MRI frames for deep learning models. Unlike traditional resizing methods like bilinear or bicubic
                                 interpolation, the learnable resizer enhances the image specifically for machine vision tasks as shown in Fig. 6.
                                 This resizer is designed to transform the spatial dimensions and feature representation of frames dynamically.
                                 The method improves both computational efficiency and model performance. The resizer is implemented as
                                 a lightweight CNN that is trained jointly with the downstream deep learning model. It consists of multiple
                                 convolution layers and uses a task-driven resizing operation that optimizes frame dimensions without
                                 compromising critical features required for accurate diagnosis. This approach allows for more intelligent resizing
                                 to emphasize the vital brain patterns, while non-informative regions and noise are suppressed.

                                 Deep learning (DL) models
                                 After the data preprocessing steps, the proposed methodology is divided into two categories, i.e., 2D CNNs
                                 and 3D CNNs. Recent research used 2D CNNs, i.e., width × height × number_of_frames, for each view
                                 and merged the results43. The proposed study reduces the number of hidden layers in the 2D CNNs because
                                 the frame selection reduces the input data size, as shown in Fig. 7. Furthermore, this research has applied 3D
                                 architecture as well, in which a shallow 3D CNN architecture, ash shown in Fig. 8, i.e., width × height × view
                                  × number_of_frames, is proposed and compared with 2D CNN and recent research that has used 3D CNN for
                                 the classification of AD23. The proposed 3D CNN captures the information from all three views simultaneously.




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                      7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 5. Sample Transverse View of Slices.




                                 Fig. 6. Selected Transverse View (A) before learnable resizer (B) after learnable resizer.



                                 Experiments and results
                                 Experimental setup
                                 As discussed in the methodology section, this research has focused on the shallow 2D- and 3D-CNN architectures
                                 to avoid the model’s underfitting and overfitting. 3D CNN is further divided into three different categories
                                 belonging to the three views, i.e., coronal, sagittal, and transverse. The 2D and 3D CNN architectures are shown
                                 in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively, where C stands for the convolutional layer, P for the pooling layer, and FC for
                                 the fully connected layer. Both architectures are shallow because of intelligent frame selection and cropping
                                 compared to the counterparts. The number of parameters for each 2D CNN is 1,152,115, while 3D CNN has a


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                              8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 7. 2D CNN architectures. Each view has its own CNN architecture with the same parameters.




                                 Fig. 8. 3D CNN architecture.



                                 total of 1,091,475 parameters. Moreover, Table 1 depicts the configurations of both the models, i.e., 2D CNNs
                                 and 3D CNNs. All the models are used with the callbacks of early stopping and reduced learning rate to improve
                                 the performance of the models.

                                 Evaluation measures
                                 The performance parameters used in this research are reported in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and
                                 F-measure. The equations for all four performance measures are given in Eqs. (6), (7), (8), and (9). True Positive
                                 (TP) are those instances whose ground label is true and is predicted as true, while True Negative (TN) are
                                 false and predicted as false. Moreover, False Positives (FP) is negative but predicted to be positive, while False


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  Parameter           Configuration
                                                      Initial Value             0.001
                                                      Nature                    Timely Decreasing (Adaptive)
                                                      Reduction Factor          0.1
                                  Learning Rate
                                                      Minimum Possible Value    0.00001
                                                      Reduction Monitoring      Validation Accuracy
                                                      Patient to Reduction      2 times
                                                      Stopping Monitoring       Validation Accuracy
                                  Stopping Criteria   Patience to Stop          4 times
                                                      Initial Learning Rate     0.01
                                                      Trainable                 Yes
                                  Weights
                                                      Initial Weights           Random
                                                      Optimizer                 Adam
                                                      Loss                      Categorical Cross Entropy
                                                      Maximum Possible Epochs   Infinite
                                  Training
                                                      Batch Size                64
                                                      Validation Split          15%
                                                      Performance Metric        Accuracy


                                 Table 1. Configuration table for the proposed DL architectures.



                                 Negatives (FN) is positive but predicted to be negative. As there are four different datasets, i.e., three 2D datasets
                                 (coronal, sagittal, and transverse) and one 3D dataset, this section has subdivided the results and described each
                                 separately.
                                                                                Precision = TP/(TP + FP)(6)
                                                                                Recall = TP/(TP + FN)(7)
                                                            F − measure = 2* (Recall * Precision) / (Recall + Precision(8)
                                                                      Accuracy = (TP + TN)/(TP + FP + FN + TN)(9)

                                 Results and discussion
                                 2D CNN
                                 All three views’ results are compiled and reported in the subsections below, which consist of training and
                                 validation plots and confusion matrices. The number of epochs for each view differs because of the callbacks.

                                 Coronal view
                                 The number of epochs required to train and validate the 2D CNN model for coronal view is 31. After 31 epochs,
                                 the model automatically stops the training as the model was going to overfit, as per our proposed callbacks
                                 mentioned in Table 1. Training and validation plots for coronal view are depicted in Fig. 9, where x-axis has
                                 total epochs until model is best fit while y-axis shows the accuracy of the model in percentage. Validation plot is
                                 slightly unsmooth because the view has still some noise which causes the underfitting while training the model.
                                 Confusion Matrix (CM)-1 shows the confusion matrix compiled between the actual labels and predicted labels.
                                 The testing accuracy of the model is 92%.

                                         CN    MCI     AD
                                  CN     130   12      8
                                  MCI    6     186     4
                                  AD     2     4       84


                                 CM-1: Confusion Matrix of 2D CNN for coronal view.



                                 Sagittal view
                                 The number of epochs required to train and validate the 2D CNN model for sagittal view is 16. After 16 epochs,
                                 the model automatically stopped the training as the model was going to overfit. Training and validation plots
                                 for the sagittal view are depicted in Fig. 10. It is shown from the figure that the model validation is not that
                                 smooth in terms of accuracy, which means that the sagittal view has less information. Moreover, CM-2 shows
                                 the confusion matrix compiled between actual and predicted labels. The testing accuracy of the model is 90.4%.




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                       | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                           10
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 9. Training and validation graph for coronal view (2D).




                                 Fig. 10. Training and validation graph for sagittal view (2D).




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x   11
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                        CN    MCI   AD
                                  CN    129   11    10
                                  MCI   6     181   9
                                  AD    6     5     79


                                 CM-2: Confusion Matrix of 2D CNN for sagittal view.



                                 Transverse view
                                 The number of epochs required to train and validate the 2D CNN model for the transverse view is 32. After 32
                                 epochs, the model automatically stopped training as the model was going to overfit. Training and validation
                                 plots for the coronal view are depicted in Fig. 11. CM-3 shows the confusion matrix compiled between the actual
                                 labels and predicted labels. The testing accuracy of the model is 93%.

                                        CN    MCI   AD
                                  CN    130   10    6
                                  MCI   5     184   7
                                  AD    3     4     83


                                 CM-3: Confusion Matrix of 2D CNN for transverse view.


                                    From the above three CMs, the testing accuracy of the coronal view is 92%, the sagittal view is 90.4%, and the
                                 transverse view has an accuracy of 93%. It can be seen from the results that the transverse view has much more
                                 information than the sagittal view because the transverse view has less zero value (no information) in a single
                                 subject’s MRI than the sagittal view. After compiling all the results separately, the mean accuracy, precision,
                                 recall, and F-measure for all three 2D CNNs are 91.8%, 90.7%, 91.7%, and 91%, respectively.

                                 3D CNN
                                 After completing a set of 2D experiments, this research has suggested 3D CNN architectures along with the
                                 results. The number of epochs required to train and validate the 3D CNN model is 34 because the data is in
                                 higher dimensions than 2D. After 34 epochs, the model automatically stopped training as the model was going
                                 to overfit. Training and validation plots for 3D data are depicted in Fig. 12. CM-4 shows the confusion matrix




                                 Fig. 11. Training and validation graph for transverse view (2D).


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                    | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                          12
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 12. Training and validation graph for 3D CNN.



                                 compiled between the actual labels and predicted labels. Compared to the other three figures of 2D CNN, the
                                 validation plots of the 3D CNN are much smoother and diverge while training. It shows that the 3D CNN can
                                 capture the information from all three views simultaneously, which avoids the model’s underfitting. Due to the
                                 high dimensions of input data for 3D CNN, it also avoided the model’s overfitting compared to other 2D CNN
                                 models. The testing accuracy reported for the 3D CNN is 96.4%.

                                        CN    MCI   AD
                                  CN    142   3     5
                                  MCI   3     191   2
                                  AD    2     1     87


                                 CM-4: Confusion Matrix of 3D CNN.



                                 Analysis and interpretation
                                 From the complete set of experiments performed on 2D- and 3D-CNN architecture, this research has analyzed
                                 the fact that data size can affect the performance of any deep learning model38. Figure 13 shows the overall
                                 performance between the 2D CNN architectures and the 3D CNN architecture proposed by this research.
                                 Figures 7 and 8 show that both models are shallow because of the intelligent frames’ selection and cropping.
                                 Compared to 2D CNNs, 3D CNN performance is much better, and the model converges correctly because of the
                                 simultaneous extraction of features from data. In 2D views, CNN models can extract features from a single one,
                                 which is not the case in 3D data. Features from the same region are extracted in 3D CNN from all three views.
                                 That is why 3D CNN models result in ~ 88% precision, recall, and F-measure better than 2D views.
                                     2D CNNs perform well but lack 3D CNNs due to the individual classification of views. Due to the side view
                                 of the brain, the sagittal view has less information than the other two views, which is why classification based on
                                 the sagittal view is low compared to the other two views. Similarly, due to the top view of the brain, the transverse
                                 view has a more informative region in the input data, which results in the best results among the other two views.
                                 The front view of the brain, coronal view, has more region than sagittal view, which results in slightly better
                                 results than sagittal. The CNN model used for the transverse view and coronal is a better fit than the sagittal view
                                 due to the less information. The fitting of CNN models depends on the number of learnable parameters in any
                                 DL model38.
                                     Table 2 compares the proposed 2D- and 3D-CNN architectures and the most relevant counterparts. The
                                 authors used 123 random frames selected from the input preprocessed data, trained all the 123 2D models
                                 separately, and then took the average of all the accuracies. It is observed that the number of parameters43 has

Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                    | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                             13
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Fig. 13. Performance comparison between the proposed architectures.



                                                                                                               Accuracy
                                  Study      Architecture      No. of Subjects   Parameters    No. of Models   (%)
                                  41         2D CNN            509               1,227,731     123             84.05
                                  25         2D VGG-19         300               138,423,208   1               87.15
                                  Proposed   2D CNN            2186              1,152,115     3               93
                                  24         3D CNN            988               10,467,315    1               84.57
                                  35         3D DenseNet-121   3512              7,628,484     1               84
                                  Proposed   3D CNN            2186              1,091,475     1               96.5


                                 Table 2. Performance comparison of the proposed architectures with counterparts.



                                 1.227 M parameters, which is more than the 2D CNN architecture proposed by this research. Results have
                                 confirmed that the performance of the proposed model is 2+% higher than the work previously presented43.
                                 Similarly, it has used a transfer learning-based 2D VGG-19 model containing 138,423,208 parameters, much
                                 more than our proposed method24. Moreover, the dataset size is almost 7 times less than our selected dataset and
                                 the accuracy is 5.85% less than our proposed method. Moreover, the number of parameters is much higher than
                                 ours, and the dataset size is also much less than ours. This is the reason our proposed model has outperformed
                                 the two intended counterparts.
                                     The 3D CNN model used in this research has fewer learnable parameters than well-known research23.
                                 The authors have performed a set of different layer-wise experiments, and the best performance for tertiary
                                 classification, as reported by the authors, is 84.57%, almost 12% less than the proposed 3D CNN architecture.
                                 Moreover, the number of subjects is just 988, which is relatively low compared to our selected dataset. The
                                 possible reason is that the number of parameters in the proposed 3D CNN is almost 10 times less than the


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                           14
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 models used in the literature. Similarly34, it used a much larger dataset size, but the number of parameters was
                                 more significant than our proposed method, while the accuracy was less than ours. The authors have used 3D
                                 DenseNet-121 architecture to train and predict the disease. Our proposed model performance is almost 12%
                                 greater than34 our intelligent frames selection and cropping, as well as the simpler CNN architecture we have
                                 proposed in this study.
                                     The benefits of the proposed work in the context of AD detection using DL are multifaceted and significant,
                                 as outlined through our contributions and corroborated by our final results. Firstly, the devised efficient frame
                                 selection and cropping method substantially reduces the dimensionality of the dataset. This reduction achieves
                                 lower latency and computational costs and minimizes the risks of overfitting and underfitting in model training,
                                 leading to more robust and reliable diagnostic models.
                                     Our novel approach facilitates a 31.1% reduction in dataset size from preprocessed frames and a remarkable
                                 92.65% reduction from raw data. Such efficiency improvements are pivotal for Deep Learning applications in
                                 AD detection, where large datasets often pose significant challenges regarding storage, processing time, and
                                 computational resources. By addressing these challenges, our method enhances the accessibility and scalability
                                 of DL applications in clinical settings.
                                     Furthermore, the study significantly lowers computational costs by approximately 33% for 2D CNNs and
                                 about 85% for 3D CNNs. This reduction is achieved without compromising the accuracy of 2D models and,
                                 notably, while improving the accuracy of 3D models. Such advancements demonstrate the effectiveness of our
                                 approach in optimizing resource utilization while maintaining, or even enhancing, diagnostic performance.
                                 Our proposal of shallow 3D and 2D architectures, as opposed to conventional deep CNN models, is particularly
                                 beneficial in enhancing the detection results across all three stages of AD, i.e., CN, MCI, and AD. This strategic
                                 choice underscores the potential of shallower architectures in capturing the nuanced features of AD progression
                                 with reduced complexity and improved interpretability.
                                     The results of our study further validate the benefits of the proposed methods. Compared to existing studies,
                                 our proposed 2D CNN model achieved a high accuracy of 93% with a significantly larger subject pool and lower
                                 parameter count, highlighting efficiency and scalability. The proposed 3D CNN model stands out by achieving
                                 the highest accuracy of 96.5% among the compared studies, with the lowest number of parameters, illustrating
                                 the potential of our approach in setting new benchmarks for AD detection accuracy and computational efficiency.
                                 In summary, the proposed work substantially benefits detecting AD by detecting a path toward more accessible,
                                 efficient, and accurate diagnostic tools. These contributions offer the field technical promise to make early and
                                 precise AD detection more feasible in clinical practices worldwide.

                                 Conclusion
                                 This paper proposes a novel method for automated detection of the Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) stages by
                                 processing the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). The solution is based on an effective hybridization of the
                                 preprocessing, frame selection, and cropping with shallow 2D and 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
                                 The preprocessing stage involved skull stripping, spatial normalization, and smoothing. Onward, the proposed
                                 pixel count-based frame selection and cropping approach is applied to the preprocessed MRI data, followed by
                                 the learnable resizer method. It renders an efficient dimension reduction. Afterward, the designed shallow 2D
                                 and 3D CNN architectures extract spatio-temporal attributes from the selected MRI data. Finally, both CNN
                                 models are evaluated for a comparative analysis. Notably, 2D CNN achieved a maximum accuracy of 93%, while
                                 3D CNN reported the highest accuracy of 96.5%. The performance of CNNs is dependent on the input data. The
                                 cleaner and more informative the data is, the more accurate the CNN model will be. This research has concluded
                                 this phenomenon by experimental results—training on the less informative data results in overfitting CNN
                                 architectures. Similarly, a CNN with more learnable parameters can lead towards the model’s overfitting and vice
                                 versa. Extracting features from data using 2D CNN architectures can lead to model underfitting compared to
                                 3D. CNN models with higher dimensions can sometimes extract more data from different views simultaneously,
                                 which is the cause behind more than 96% accuracy.
                                     Moreover, training and inference time for shallow CNN models and small-sized data is less than that for deeper
                                 CNN models. This is why MRI, a complex and high-dimensional dataset, is successfully classified with the help
                                 of less learnable parameters. The frame selection and shallow CNN architectures proposed in this study can be
                                 adapted for remote sensing applications, where large-scale image data requires efficient processing. By reducing
                                 computational demands, our approach facilitates real-time analysis in resource-constrained environments.
                                     An effective preprocessing is one of the main challenges in the MRI data analysis. If the preprocessing pipeline
                                 changes according to the MRI data, the model overfitting or underfitting can be avoided. A limitation of this
                                 research is that we have followed specific preprocessing steps, such as skull stripping and different normalization
                                 and registration methods. In the future, the incorporation of other potential preprocessing approaches for
                                 feature extraction and denoising, such as wavelet decomposition and empirical mode decomposition, can be
                                 explored. Moreover, the performance of different feature selection algorithms, such as metaheuristic optimizers,
                                 will be studied.

                                 Data availability
                                 The ADNI database is publicly available for research purpose and it is composed of the Magnetic Resonance
                                 Images ( MRIs). This data set is used in this study.

                                 Received: 15 April 2024; Accepted: 7 March 2025




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                15
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 References
                                  1. Ulep, M. G., Saraon, S. K. & McLea, S. Alzheimer disease. J. Nurse Practitioners. 14 (3), 129–135 (2018).
                                  2. Gauthier, S., Webster, C., Servaes, S., Morais, J. & Rosa-Neto, P. World Alzheimer Report 2022: Life after Diagnosis: Navigating
                                     Treatment, Care and Support Ed (Alzheimer’s disease international London, England, 2022).
                                  3. Lorio, S. et al. Neurobiological origin of spurious brain morphological changes: A quantitative MRI study. Hum. Brain. Mapp. 37
                                     (5), 1801–1815 (2016).
                                  4. Arafa, D. A., Moustafa, H. E. D., Ali-Eldin, A. M. & Ali, H. A. Early detection of Alzheimer’s disease based on the state-of-the-art
                                     deep learning approach: A comprehensive survey. Multimed. Tools Appl., pp. 1–42 (2022).
                                  5. Ebrahimighahnavieh, M. A., Luo, S. & Chiong, R. Deep learning to detect Alzheimer’s disease from neuroimaging: A systematic
                                     literature review. Comput. Methods Progr. Biomed. 187, 105242 (2020).
                                  6. Moradi, E., Pepe, A., Gaser, C., Huttunen, H. & Tohka, J. and A. s. D. N. Initiative, Machine learning framework for early MRI-
                                     based Alzheimer’s conversion prediction in MCI subjects. Neuroimage 104, 398–412 (2015).
                                  7. Sharma, S. & Mandal, P. K. A comprehensive report on machine learning-based early detection of Alzheimer’s disease using multi-
                                     modal neuroimaging data. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR). 55 (2), 1–44 (2022).
                                  8. Hinrichs, C. et al. Spatially augmented LPboosting for AD classification with evaluations on the ADNI dataset. Neuroimage 48 (1),
                                     138–149 (2009).
                                  9. Terry, R. D. Alzheimer’s disease and the aging brain. J. Geriatr. Psychiatr. Neurol. 19 (3), 125–128 (2006).
                                 10. Rathore, S., Habes, M., Iftikhar, M. A., Shacklett, A. & Davatzikos, C. A review on neuroimaging-based classification studies and
                                     associated feature extraction methods for Alzheimer’s disease and its prodromal stages. NeuroImage 155, pp. 530–548 (2017).
                                 11. Soydaner, D. Attention mechanism in neural networks: Where it comes and where it goes. Neural Comput. Appl. 34 (16), 13371–
                                     13385 (2022).
                                 12. Li, X. et al. Deep learning attention mechanism in medical image analysis: Basics and beyonds. Int. J. Netw. Dyn. Intell., pp. 93–116
                                     (2023).
                                 13. Liu, Z. et al. Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease via an attention-based multi-scale convolutional neural network. Knowl. Based Syst.
                                     238, 107942 (2022).
                                 14. Yadav, B. K. & Hashmi, M. F. An attention-based CNN architecture for Alzheimer’s classification and detection. In 2023 IEEE IAS
                                     Global Conference on Emerging Technologies (GlobConET). IEEE, pp. 1–5 (2023).
                                 15. Golovanevsky, M., Eickhoff, C. & Singh, R. Multimodal attention-based deep learning for Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis. J. Am.
                                     Med. Inform. Assoc. 29 (12), 2014–2022 (2022).
                                 16. Vincent, P. et al. Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network with a local denoising
                                     criterion. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 11, 12, (2010).
                                 17. Hinton, G. E. Deep belief networks. Scholarpedia 4 (5), 5947 (2009).
                                 18. Ebrahimi, A. Luo, and F. T. A. S. Disease neuroimaging initiative, convolutional neural networks F.r Alzheimer’s disease detection
                                     on MRI images. J. Med. Imaging. 8 (2), 024503–024503 (2021).
                                 19. Cui, R., Liu, M. & Initiative, A. D. N. RNN-based longitudinal analysis for diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Comput. Med. Imaging
                                     Graph. 73, 1–10 (2019).
                                 20. Sharma, M., Sharma, P., Pachori, R. B. & Acharya, U. R. Dual-tree complex wavelet transform-based features for automated
                                     alcoholism identification. Int. J. Fuzzy Syst. 20 (4), 1297–1308 (2018).
                                 21. Farooq, A., Anwar, S., Awais, M. & Rehman, S. A deep CNN based multi-class classification of Alzheimer’s disease using MRI. In
                                     IEEE International Conference on Imaging systems and techniques (IST). IEEE, pp. 1–6. (2017).
                                 22. Haarburger, C. et al. Multi scale curriculum CNN for context-aware breast MRI malignancy classification. In International
                                     Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 495–503 (2019).
                                 23. Khagi, B. & Kwon, G. R. 3D CNN design for the classification of Alzheimer’s disease using brain MRI and PET. IEEE Access. 8,
                                     217830–217847 (2020).
                                 24. Mehmood, A. et al. A transfer learning approach for early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease on MRI images. Neuroscience 460,
                                     43–52 (2021).
                                 25. Acharya, R. M. H. & Singh, D. K. Alzheimer disease classification using transfer learning. In 5th International Conference on
                                     Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC), pp. 1503–1508 (2021).
                                 26. Deepak, S. & Ameer, P. Automated categorization of brain tumor from mri using Cnn features and Svm. J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz.
                                     Comput. 12 (8), 8357–8369 (2021).
                                 27. Shakarami, A., Tarrah, H. & Mahdavi-Hormat, A. A CAD system for diagnosing Alzheimer’s disease using 2D slices and an
                                     improved AlexNet-SVM method. Optik 212, 164237 (2020).
                                 28. Ebrahim, D., Ali-Eldin, A. M., Moustafa, H. E. & Arafat, H. Alzheimer disease early detection using convolutional neural networks.
                                     In 15th international conference on computer engineering and systems (ICCES). IEEE, pp. 1–6. (2020).
                                 29. Yadav, K. S. & Miyapuram, K. P. A novel approach towards early detection of Alzheimer’s disease using deep learning on magnetic
                                     resonance images. In International Conference on Brain Informatics. Springer, pp. 486–495 (2021).
                                 30. Buvaneswari, P. & Gayathri, R. Deep learning-based segmentation in classification of Alzheimer’s disease. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 46 (6),
                                     5373–5383 (2021).
                                 31. Odusami, M., Maskeliūnas, R., Damaševičius, R. & Krilavičius, T. Analysis of features of alzheimer’s disease: detection of early
                                     stage from functional brain changes in magnetic resonance images using a finetuned ResNet18 network. Diagnostics 11(6), 1071
                                     (2021).
                                 32. Prakash, D. et al. Diagnosing Alzheimer’s disease based on multiclass MRI scans using transfer learning techniques. Curr. Med.
                                     Imaging. 17 (12), 1460–1472 (2021).
                                 33. Huang, Y., Xu, J., Zhou, Y., Tong, T. & Zhuang, X. S. D. N. Initiative, diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease via multi-modality 3D
                                     convolutional neural network. Front. NeuroSci. 13, 509 (2019).
                                 34. Solano-Rojas, B., Villalón-Fonseca, R. & Marín-Raventós, G. Alzheimer’s disease early detection using a low cost three-dimensional
                                     densenet-121 architecture. In International Conference on Smart Homes and Health Telematics. Springer, pp. 3–15 (2020).
                                 35. Wang, H. et al. Ensemble of 3D densely connected convolutional network for diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and
                                     Alzheimer’s disease, Neurocomputing 333, 145–156 (2019).
                                 36. Zhang, Z. and Farzad Khalvati. Introducing vision transformer for Alzheimer’s disease classification task with 3D input. arXiv
                                     preprint arXiv:2210.01177 (2022).
                                 37. Sarraf, S. et al. OViTAD: Optimized vision transformer to predict various stages of Alzheimer’s disease using resting-state fMRI
                                     and structural MRI data. Brain Sci. 13 (2), 260 (2023).
                                 38. Han, S. et al. Dsd: Dense-sparse-dense training for deep neural networks, presented at the 5th International Conference on
                                     Learning Representations, France (2017).
                                 39. Weiner, M. W. et al. The Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative 3: Continued innovation for clinical trial improvement.
                                     Alzheimer’s Dement. 13 (5), 561–571 (2017).
                                 40. Mueller, S. G. et al. The Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative. Neuroimaging Clin. 15 (4), 869–877 (2005).
                                 41. a., R. P. & Toennies, K. D. Segmentation of medical images using adaptive region growing, Med. Imaging Image Process, pp. 1337–
                                     1346 (2017).
                                 42. Ashburner, J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. Neuroimage 38, 95–113 (2007).



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                    | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                                 16
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 43. Pan, A. Z. D., Jia, L., Huang, Y., Frizzell, T. & Song, X. Early detection of Alzheimer’s disease using magnetic resonance imaging: A
                                     novel approach combining convolutional neural networks and ensemble learning. Front. NeuroSci., 14, (2020).

                                 Acknowledgements
                                 The authors are grateful to Ghulam Ishaq khan institute of engineering sciences and technology, American Uni-
                                 versity of the Middle East, Effat University, National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, University
                                 of Malaya, Cracow University of Technology, and Polish Academy of Sciences for the technical and logistic
                                 support. They are also thankful to the Effat University, Cracow University of Technology, and Polish Academy of
                                 Sciences for financially supporting this work.

                                 Author contributions
                                 Conceptualization, Jalees ur Rahman, Muhammad Hanif, Saeed Mian Qaisar, and Usman Haider; Methodology,
                                 Jalees ur Rahman, Muhammad Hanif, and Obaid ur Rehman; Implementation, Jalees ur Rahman, and Obaid
                                 ur Rehman; Formal analysis, Jalees ur Rahman, Muhammad Hanif, Usman Haider, and Saeed Mian Qaisar;
                                 Investigation, Obaid ur Rehman, and Pawel Plawiak; Resources, Saeed Mian Qaisar, Muhammad Hanif, and
                                 Pawel Plawiak; Writing—original draft preparation, Jalees ur Rahman, Saeed Mian Qaisar, Obaid ur Rehman,
                                 and Usman Haider; Writing—review and editing, Muhammad Hanif, and Pawel Plawiak; Visualization, Jalees
                                 ur Rahman, and Obaid ur Rehman; Supervision, Muhammad Hanif, and Saeed Mian Qaisar; Project adminis-
                                 tration, Saeed Mian Qaisar, and Muhammad Hanif; Funding acquisition, Saeed Mian Qaisar, and Pawel Plawiak.
                                 All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

                                 Declarations

                                 Competing interests
                                 The authors declare no competing interests.

                                 Additional information
                                 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.M.Q. or P.P.
                                 Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
                                 Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                                 institutional affiliations.
                                 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
                                 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in
                                 any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide
                                 a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have
                                 permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or
                                 other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
                                 otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence
                                 and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
                                 obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​//​ ​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​co
                                                                                                                                                              ​ ​m​m​o​
                                 n​s​.​o​r​g/​ ​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/b
                                                                 ​ ​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​​​​.​​

                                 © The Author(s) 2025




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:9238                    | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-93560-x                                                                 17
