IAES International Journal of Artificial Intelligence (IJ-AI)
Vol. 14, No. 2, April 2025, pp. 1201~1210
ISSN: 2252-8938, DOI: 10.11591/ijai.v14.i2.pp1201-1210                                                          1201

Advanced methodologies resolving dimensionality complications
 for autism neuroimaging dataset: a comprehensive guide for
                         beginners

                                Meenakshi Malviya, Chandra Jayaraman
                          Department of Computer Science, Christ University, Bangalore, India




 Article Info                           ABSTRACT
 Article history:                       Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is gender biased neurodevelopmental
                                        condition consisting of a triad of physiological symptoms. Neural images
 Received May 11, 2024                  and neurobiology of cognitive disorders are complex but provide significant
 Revised Oct 18, 2024                   information and accurate visualization of developmental changes. The
 Accepted Nov 14, 2024                  diagnosis is time-consuming and necessitates sufficient evidence to
                                        distinguish the disorder from other concomitant diseases. The most recent
                                        area of interest for cognitive research is neuroimaging, which is used to
 Keywords:                              study the disorder's impact, affected region, and functional connectivity
                                        between the regions of interest. The challenges in the domain are the
 2D-3D dimensional images               availability of data, the modalities of data, the selection of the correct
 Autism spectrum disorder               processing strategies, and the result assessment complications. The study
 Filters                                employed machine learning (ML) methods to process the autism data in both
 Neuroimages                            structural and functional data formats collected from the autism brain
 Peak signal-to-noise ratio             imaging data exchange (ABIDE) consortium. A comparative analysis among
 Preprocessing                          image processing methodologies with both data formats was successfully
 Signal-to-noise-ratio                  implemented. The variations in the processing pipeline and the outputs
                                        strongly suggest an emerging need for 3D/4D images to visualize better,
                                        accurate feature extraction and classification. The study aims to support the
                                        researchers in identifying the correct image format for specific objectives
                                        and the ML techniques, such as Gaussian median filters, segmentation
                                        methodologies for 2D data, or a well-defined preprocessing pipeline for 3D
                                        data, to achieve reliable and generalized results.
                                                            This is an open access article under the CC BY-SA license.




 Corresponding Author:
 Meenakshi Malviya
 Department of Computer Science, Christ University
 Central Campus, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
 Email: meenakshimalviya@res.christuniversity.in



1.    INTRODUCTION
          Automated real-time object identification is crucial for accurate decision-making in numerous
domains using multimedia data. Image processing is the most preferred method for object identification in
various application fields, including academics, product development, e-commerce, and healthcare [1]. The
core applications of image analysis are feature extraction, security and surveillance, image recognition, and
medical image analysis. Image analysis tends to image enhancement for standard images (images other than
medical scans) [2], but for the medical image data, there is a predefined process including enhancements and
segmentation for accurate classification [3]. Processing complexity with medical images for segmentation,
classification, and localization of regions of interest associated with an anomaly can be resolved by
implementing artificial intelligence (AI) strategies [4], [5]. Neuroimages in brain science are vital in the


Journal homepage: http://ijai.iaescore.com
1202                                                                                        ISSN: 2252-8938

current scenario of a higher prevalence rate of cognitive disorders. Neuroimaging study provides insight into
the brain in two main aspects: structural and functional. The discipline of neuroimaging has been enhanced by
neuroimaging techniques such as structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), which provide information in multiple forms. The high-resolution images are
visually scannable and interpretable by experts but have not yet been explored thoroughly. Extensive use of
neuroimages in multiple formats such as structural scan slices-2D and the functional scans for temporal studies
-3D- need specific strategies to process the individual format. Neural images and neurobiology of cognitive
disorders like autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is complex to understand but provide significant information
and visualization of developmental variations. ASD is gender biased neurodevelopmental condition consisting
of a triad of physiological symptoms: repetitive behavior, communication impairment-verbal/nonverbal, and
social interaction. The heterogeneous nature and symptom comorbidity are the prime challenges to diagnosing
ASD. AI with neuroimaging produced great results in various classification research works.
          The imaging dataset collected from distinct sites and in different forms needs to be standardized and
cleaned for further analysis for accurate and reliable results. The preprocessing pipeline for 2D and 3D
images contains multiple steps. Hence, it is important to explore the difference in the process and understand
the output quality measurement units for both formats. The challenges are addressed and explained to
improve the quality of the image analysis results.
          Various imaging modalities and formats need to be in a standard format to be implemented with AI
strategies. Medical image processing with multidimensional image formats is complicated due to the
additional information added as the additional dimension. The primary obstacles with multidimensional
images are large volumes, data complexity, and spatial and temporal information that need advanced methods
over traditional image processing methods. Another complication is the interpretation and correct analysis of
large-volume data. An experimental analysis was performed on the structural and functional data collected
for autism disorder. The data slices extracted from the scans as 2D images and the magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) as 3D and 4D format (time is the fourth dimension) are processed using various AI methods.
The preprocessing pipeline for 2D images consists of filters, resizing, and resampling, and the 3D MRI
preprocessed using realignment, reslicing, segmentation, normalization, and smoothing. The combination of
two complicated fields, which are autism classification and multidimensionality of medical images, makes it
more significant. A comparative analysis is presented to help the neuroimaging research select the
preprocessing pipeline based on the data format for effective and reliable analysis.


2. DOMAIN STUDY
2.1. Autism spectrum disorder
          High heterogeneity in clinical implications and underlying neurobiology of ASD is the prime reason
for not yet achieving consistent biomarkers [6]. Identifying consistent biomarkers or specific patterns for
classification as whole or subcategories of ASD using neuroimaging techniques is the main objective of
current studies worldwide. The challenges with autism neuroimaging analysis and studies are a lack of
dataset availability, heterogeneous nature of data as collected from multiple sources and sites, data
complexity, and dimensionality. Autism imaging data is complex due to the detailed anatomical structures it
contains. To elaborate on the complications in ASD diagnosis with AI tools, the characteristics and features
are discussed in this session. Autism is a neurodevelopmental impairment. The associated behavioral and
brain changes are subject to vary across various stages of age. Autism is frequently associated with other
diseases such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), intellectual disability, or anxiety problems
[7], [8]. Atomizing the complicated connections between the comorbidities and their impact on brain
structure require a huge dataset and expert systems [9]. Autism brain imaging data repositories are available
globally, but very few are available on open-source platforms. To generalize the findings, sufficient data
must be available to establish robust and reliable neuroimaging markers and perform more statistical
analysis. To ensure the standardization and reproducibility of neuroimaging analysis, feature fusion from
multimodal datasets such as structural and functional images is applied in recent autism diagnosis research;
the structural images for morphometric features and functional images for functional connectivity and region
of interest (ROI) analysis. A new multimodality fusion classification approach to explore the uniqueness of
schizophrenia and ASD [10]. Due to the methodological variations in the processing pipelines, interpretation
and clinical implementation of findings are yet to be achieved.

2.2. Neuroimaging
         Medical images are essential for anatomical studies and helpful in disease diagnosis. The images
collected from various source are sensitive to different types of quality attenuations known as noise. Some of
the common noises are salt and pepper, Gaussian noise, speckle noise, poisson noise, and blurred noise removal

Int J Artif Intell, Vol. 14, No. 2, April 2025: 1201-1210
Int J Artif Intell                             ISSN: 2252-8938                                               1203

and filtering techniques used in medical images [11]. Noise in the scans exists due to the mechanical issues,
technical settings or patient related chages such as the subject’s position, physiological artifacts, image quality,
and protocols applied at the time of scanning [12]. Dimensionality and data volume are two of the major criteria
that need to be considered when selecting suitable strategies to process neuroimages. Removing noise artefacts
is an essential process for imaging datasets. It can be performed using external recordings–electrode arrays,
shielding and grounding, or data-driven methods such as statistical filtering–Gaussian, filter, median filter,
wiener filter implemented with machine learning (ML) methods [13]. To apply the data for developing
computer added solutions, require to be converted into standard format. A single 3D scan consisting of hundreds
of slices which in turn stored in digital form. The volumes are likely to be increased with the increase of count
of scans, which is difficult to store and handle. Such voluminous data need more computational resources,
storage capacity, and time. Medical images typically available in three-dimensional and four-dimensional
(neuroimaging informatics technology initiative (NifTI)) format, that is, 3D scans with a time parameter.
Algorithms need to account for spatial relationships, anatomical structures across slices, and temporal changes.
          The preprocessing of 2D neuroimaging contains the methodology to perform data cleansing,
enhancement, and interpretation. Some of the most common types of noise present in the images are
Gaussian noise [14], salt-and-pepper noise, speckle noise, beam hardening artifacts, motion artifacts, and
geometric distortions, in addition with some compression artifacts like blurring, blockiness, intensity
variations due to magnetic effects. The noise exists in 3D images is similar to the 2D images but contains
some additional types of noise, such as spike noise, susceptibility artifacts, and ghosting artifacts. Specific to
fMRI images, patient movment variation, head motion artifact, and hardware limitations also cause image
quality degradation. The artifacts need to be addressed carefully and processed correctly for consistent and
reliable results. Spatial and temporal are the two types of MRI need to be processed for artefact removal.
Some of the most common artifacts present in the NIfTI format are:
‒ Thermal noise (Gaussian noise) – random electric fluctuations within the scanner.
‒ Motion artifacts – blurring, ghosting, or misalignment due to patien movement.
‒ Physiological noise – periodic signal fluctuations due to cardiac pulsation and respiration.
‒ Scanner drift – low-frequency intensity in image due to magnetic field or sensitive over a time span.
‒ Susceptibility artifacts – geometric distortions and signal loss due to air tissue interfaces like sinuses.
‒ Partial volume effects – averaging the signal, reduction in contrast, and spatial resolution.
‒ Spike noise – sudden transient in the time series due to hardware issues.
‒ RF interference, gibbs ringing, chemical shift, gradient nonlinearities, and eddy current artifacts.
          The 2D image is a set of pixels, whereas the 3D and 4D images are known as a set of voxels.
Significant variation was observed in the artifacts and noises present in both image formats. JPEG images
contain compression noise, and the NIfTI images consist of motion, physiological, and scanner-related
inconsistencies. Normalization processes the JPEG images for intensity correction and NIfTI images for
spatial and temporal corrections. Based on the difference in both image formats, the study presented some
highly recommended methods to enhance the image quality, with experimental analysis and results.

2.3. Pre-processing
          In medical imaging, 2D and 3D scans refer to different methods of capturing and visualizing
medical images. The key differences between the scans are discussed in this section. First-image
representation, where 2D images are flat images containing structural information in a single-plane form at
the other hand a more comprehensive view of the anatomy or pathology scanned with the volume added as
the third dimension, allowing visualization of structures in multiple planes, is known as a 3D image.
          Pre-processing extracts detailed information to provide a better vision and interpretation of the
imaging datasets [15]. The pre-processing pipeline for medical images contains predefined steps, including
noise removal, artifact removal, contrast enhancement, registration, and spatial normalization. As discussed
above, 3D images have additional and intense information in the voxel form, a pixel with volume. The
significance of these images is in the higher resolution, detailed information, and more clarity and
consistency. 3D images are expensive and complex due to mechanical requirements, machine size, expert
supervision, and larger volumes. Data alignment to a single slice is easy, but a set of multiple slices scanned
at different time intervals is complicated and needs to be monitored carefully. Data segmentation in JPEG
images defines the ROI and helps in masking, but in NIfTI images, it is a tedious task because the images are
segmented into five fundamental segments known as grey matter (GM), white matter (WM), cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), bone, and soft tissues. Segmentation is crucial to accurately achieving the ROI analysis.
Normalization involves transforming the data images to template coordinates to compare the brain activities
within a subject or a group of subjects in a common standard anatomical space. Smoothing is a blurring
effect performed by applying a three-dimensional Gaussian kernel to the normalized images to increase the
signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) and adjust the spatial variability. The study performed all the preprocessing steps

          Advanced methodologies resolving dimensionality complications for autism … (Meenakshi Malviya)
1204                                                                                         ISSN: 2252-8938

with the resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) images to achieve noise free
standanrdized form of data.


3.   METHOD
         This section consists of dataset description, the ML algorithms applied with 2D and 3D datasets for
data cleaning, and quality measurements for quality analysis, and results after performing denoising. The
two-dimensional data applied to the convolutional neural network (CNN) model before and after denoinsing,
for classification and achieved higher accuracy with the denoised data. The preprocessing pipeline
implemented with fMRI, achieved high contrast images and images segments for volumetric, surface based,
and functional connectivity findings.

3.1. Dataset description
          The dataset applied for the analysis is taken from autism brain imaging data exchange (ABIDE II), an
open-source repository of neuroimaging scans in various modalities, and clinical findings and demographic
facts collected from multi-site global collaboration to support the researchers [16]. Structural, functional, and
diffusion are various modalities of MRI, where sMRI is used for T1-weighted (T1-W) and T2-weighted
(T2-W) high-resolution spatial and static information. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) illustrates the WM fiber
tract using two parameters: functional anisotropy and mean diffusivity. The data consists of 23 sMRI and
rs-fMRI scans with a segregation of 13 (autism) and 10 (normal control); all the images are in NIfTI (4D)
format. The jpg (2D) slices are extracted using Python (nibabel package) and stored as a 2D dataset.

3.2. Denoising
          Two datasets were created using the jpg slices and blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) data for
analysis. The jpg provides the structural information, and the fMRI data provides physiological information
and functional network attenuation-related features, which are useful for classification [17]. NIfTI is a
preferred file format that consists of MRI scans with a header file and BOLD signals. The BOLD signals are
extracted from the raw images and processed using the preprocessing pipeline, where each step refines the
signals for denoising [18]. The process begins with slice-time correction, followed by realignment,
registration, and segmentation into grey, WM, CSF, and normalization as the final step. High-quality brain
images are essential to achieve high contrast and lower noise rates [19]. AI algorithms are equipped with the
capacity to analyze the quality of an image, enhance the quality, and produce mathematical evidence for the
classification of the given image.
          An experimental analysis compared the image quality generated post-application of various filters and
the related peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) metric values [20]. The 2D images are processed with Python
image processing packages such as OpenCV, scikit-image, NumPy, SciPy, Pillow, and TensorFlow. Two
fundamental metrics, PSNR and SNR are applied for quality measurement in various image-based studies. SNR
is calculated by dividing the signal’s power by the noise’s power, but it does not consider the human visual
system. The image quality for this analysis is calculated PSNR. PSNR is a logarithmic measure calculated by
taking the square root of the mean squared error between the original and reconstructed images; the metric is
more accurate as it considers the human visual system. The mathematical expression for PSNR as in (1).
                                   2
                                𝑀𝐴𝑋𝑉𝐴𝐿𝑈𝐸
         𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅 = 10 × 𝑙𝑜𝑔10 (               )                                                              (1)
                                   𝑀𝑆𝐸


Where, MAXVALUE is the maximum possible value for a pixel (255 for an 8-bit image); MSE is mean squared
error between the original image and the reconstructed image. A PSNR of 30 dB or higher is considered good
quality, and a PSNR of 40 dB or higher is considered excellent quality.
          The NIfTI scans are processed with the CONN toolbox [21]. The process was assessed using statistical
parametric mapping (SPM), check registration module, visual analysis using the overlay functions on the
segmented images, and the denoising results were examined using the histogram quality control–functional
connectivity (QC-FC) charts. The aim of study is to present a result-oriented denoising strategies to prepare the
data for reliable and accurate classification of images.

3.3. Experimental analysis
          Filters can be defined on the neighboring elements and used to observe the prominent features to
discriminate the structure of the brain [22]. Table 1 is an empirical analysis of image quality measures for
autistic brains when applied 2D images with specific filters. Each slice was deflated at an average rate of 5%



Int J Artif Intell, Vol. 14, No. 2, April 2025: 1201-1210
Int J Artif Intell                                    ISSN: 2252-8938                                           1205

during the image conversion, and the header information could not be interpreted for the data. Figure 1 shows
the output slices acquired after adding Gaussian noise to the images.


                                      Table 1. An empirical analysis of various filters
                        Filters          Image before adding noise   Image after adding noise   .gif image
                     Gausian filter               20.00                              22.0         33.58
                     Median filter                19.93                            22.34          38.13




                                  Figure 1. The sliced image scans of autistic brain MRI


          The Gaussian and median filters are the most recommended for medical images applied for
denoising [23]. Gaussian filter with different sizes of kernels, such as 3×3, 5×5, and 7×7, was applied as trial
and test. The smaller kernel size produced maximum accuracy with higher processing time. The PSNR was
calculated for the filtered images using a 5×5 kernel size. Figure 2, row 2, shows the filtered images without
adding the noise, and row 3, after adding the noise. The images display the implemented filter and PSNR.




                                      Figure 2. Denoised image slices of the brain MRI


          Second, the image snapshots, taken from the dataset, were in .gif format. The visuals of the image
are more evident than the sliced images. The median filter removes noise from the scans and preserves the
WM-GM contrast at a larger scale for further analysis [24]. Several segmentation algorithms are available for
segmentation and edge detection to divide the image into meaningful regions for further processing.
The current work aims to denoise the images and, hence, the band-pass filters applied. Figure 3(a) displayed
visual differences between original and filtered images and PSNR measures. The band-pass filter helps
emphasize the edges and texture considered features, which are achieved by isolating the frequency range.
Band-pass filters yielded better-quality images, where brain regions were segmented as edges and texture
[25], as shown in Figure 3(b). However, it is seen that images are still noisy and may cause biased decisions.
The denoising was performed successfully, and based on the SNR scale, results can be recommended for
further analysis, such as segmentation, feature extraction, or classification.
          The denoising performed on the other 3D format, recommending the 3D images for further analysis,
depends on multiple preprocessing stages with specific parameters, such as realignment for motion
correction, registration of all the slices belonging to the image to the origin (0 0 0), registration of the images
to the standard Montreal Neurological Institute template (MNI) space, brain extraction by removing the
nonbrain regions, segmentation, and smoothing [26]. The realignment results are stored as the regressors for

          Advanced methodologies resolving dimensionality complications for autism … (Meenakshi Malviya)
1206                                                                                        ISSN: 2252-8938

quality analysis to accept and reject the images. The translation range for accepted scans was set to (<2 mm),
and the rotation at (<0.5 degrees) and framewise displacement to choose the image with a significant rate of
motion. Gaussian kernel with 8 mm full width at half maximum (FWHM) applied for smoothing; the kernel
size varies–4 mm, 8 mm, and 12 mm for the hypothesis set. Figure 4(a) depicts the original image with the
MNI template overlay, clearly showing that the image is noisy. Figure 4(b) is the resulting image
preprocessed with the skull stripping, registration, and normalization.




                          (a)                                                      (b)

       Figure 3. Filtered images using (a) Gaussian and median filters and (b) low-pass, high-pass filter




                                 (a)                                        (b)

                Figure 4. The NIfTI images (a) raw brain scan and (b) preprocessed brain scan


         The resulting images in Figure 5 are the segmented images that help to explore each individual brain
region to extract the values, coordinates, and volume of a voxel belonging to the particular region.
In cognitive disorder research using neuroimaging, grey and whiter matter segments are considered
significant regions of volumetric and surface-based analysis. The segmentation quality differs with the
implementation of filters, Gaussian kernel provides better result for sMRI segmentations and volumetric
analysis [27].




                     Figure 5. The segmented images into 5 basic tissue classes of brain


          The physiological and motion signals in the scans need to be corrected for each voxel in time series
extracted from the temporal data. Component correction (CompCor), and image transformation using rigid
body transformation with 6-parameters (translation and rotation for x,y,z dimensions), 12-parameters
(translation, rotation, scaling and shearing for x,y,z) applied for observing the impact of denoising [28].
After completion of the process, temporal artifacts are refined using bandpass filters. The time series
extraction for temporal data is crucial. The data denoising was implemented using the Bandpass filters, with
the range starting with 0.001 Hz and ending with 0.09 Hz using trial and error methods. The best results were
achieved between 0.008 Hz for the high pass and 0.09 Hz for the low pass filter.
          The denoising produces the results concerning functional connectivity analysis and needs to be
assessed for noise effects on functional connectivity. The quality analysis scatter plot after denoising,

Int J Artif Intell, Vol. 14, No. 2, April 2025: 1201-1210
Int J Artif Intell                             ISSN: 2252-8938                                           1207

in Figure 6, presents a relationship between the valid scans and the mean motion. The dots in the graph are
the data points, the horizontal axis scale is valid scans, and the vertical axis scale is the MeanMotion
measures. The quartiles depict the invalid scan. The plot is a quality analysis after denoising performed to
check the effect of noise on the functional connectivity; the correlation between QC-FC is an artifact impact
that should be flattened or minimized by denoising the current result, S1 depicts the outlier scan.




                     Figure 6. Quality analysis denoinsing: distribution of QC-FC association


         The graph in Figure 7 shows the distribution of functional connectivity values before (the gray
shaded area) and after denoising the yellow shaded area). Where all the twenty-three images are seen
smoother after denoising, and the accuracy is observed as 88.4%. The next quality analysis performed on
single images in the form of scatter plot, displayed in Figure 8 depicts the pre (the gray shaded area) and
post-denoising (the yellow shaded area) effects on the connectivity measures, the deviations suggest the
correction of noise.




        Figure 7. Quality analysis after denoising for the functional connectivity distribution (FC-QC)
          Advanced methodologies resolving dimensionality complications for autism … (Meenakshi Malviya)
1208                                                                                          ISSN: 2252-8938




            Figure 8. Voxel-wise distribution-scatter plot and histogram before and after denoising


        The preprocessing results shown in the Figures 7 and 8, are the quality analysis results for jpg, gif,
anatomic, and functional images. The results helps to eliminate the volumes that can effect the classification
accuracy. Multiple tools are suggested for MRI processing in various neuroimaging research works, such as
FMRIB Software Library (FSL), analysis of functional neuroimages (AFNI) [29], SPM [30], advanced
normalization tools (ANTs), FreeSurfer [31], 3D slicer, neuroimaging in Python (NiPy), neuroimaging in
Python-pipelines and interfaces (Nipype), and CONN for resting state and task-based connectivity analysis.


4.    RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
          Advancements in the automated classification model using medical images also require an update in
the preprocessing pipeline. Although neuroimaging research in ASD produces a huge amount of information,
it is challenging to achieve high-quality MRI images. The selection of the image processing pipeline is
equally important as the selection of the correct imaging modality for accurate classification. The study
presented modality-based denoising approaches to increase image quality. The denoising results proved that
the jpg images are lossy and contain static information but are helpful for structure-based classification. The
high-resolution 3D images are a source of temporal information, but the denoising is comparatively
time-consuming and complicated, useful for event-based, resting state connectivity analysis such as cognitive
disorders. Visual check and quality assurance parameters were observed successfully for both modalities.
The MRI modalities are preferred for multiple cognitive disorder diagnosis using structural information,
functional connectivity analysis, and the fusion of the features. Measurement consistency is crucial for
parcellation and brain segmentation quality. Quality control ensures the detection of inaccuracies and
correcting or excluding if required. The image quality for JPEG images was assessed using the CNN model
with the raw images and filtered images; the classification rate was found to be higher after denoising.
The functional images were applied for ROI analysis, and a significant difference in the connectivity
measures before and after preprocessing was found. The study highlighted the neuroimaging modality
variations and the appropriate denoising strategies to achieve reliable, generalized, and accurate
classification. The study also emphasized the ROI analysis using the segmented images, which is crucial for
future analysis. The work was implemented with a limited number of images and can be performed with a
larger dataset. The study is not applied to medical images of injury or tumor, and we believe structural
modalities are useful for such classification. The challenge for researchers currently consists of critical issues
such as multisite and multimodal datasets, multiple tools and techniques, and the selection of preprocessing
steps. The current study offers extensive comparative results, aiming to guide neuroimaging researchers in
choosing suitable modalities and preprocessing for a particular problem.

Int J Artif Intell, Vol. 14, No. 2, April 2025: 1201-1210
Int J Artif Intell                                      ISSN: 2252-8938                                                          1209

5.   CONCLUSION
         Due to the complex interactions and comorbidities with other impairments, the information
observed using imaging data needs to be standardized and generalized globally. Dealing with the complexity
effectively and extracting significant information from these images requires advanced techniques and
algorithms. The results observed using 2D image denoising motivated using 3D images in further research to
improve the process and achieve more discriminative results. Clear and intense information is crucial to
achieving higher accuracy, which is only possible with 3D images. The future work is to implement more
images with AI methods to prove the importance of MRI images for cognitive research. The methodological
improvement also depends on the quality and dimensionality of the dataset. We tried some autistic MRI
images in the single-layer format and found that the images were not as visually clear as in the 3D format and
did not execute well with the applied filters. The need for present AI methodologies is a huge, intense, and
more informative dataset to produce computer-added solutions for disorders like autism. There exists a
magnificent diversity in the functional connectivity in the brain, which directly correlates with the
heterogeneous nature of autism. The study suggests MRI images produce extensive information for
underlying disorders. To address the challenges of autism, collective efforts in data repository initiatives,
quality control, and standard tools and methodology for analysis are required.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     The author thanks the data repository ABIDE II for permitting access to the dataset.


REFERENCES
[1]    S. Ramesh, “Image processing and intelligent remote sensing in e-commerce: revolutionizing visual shopping experiences,”
       Journal of Image Processing and Intelligent Remote Sensing, no. 35, pp. 20–23, 2023, doi: 10.55529/jipirs.35.20.23.
[2]    Z. I. Azhari, S. Setumin, A. D. Rosli, and S. J. A. Bakar, “A systematic literature review on hardware implementation of image
       processing,” International Journal of Reconfigurable and Embedded Systems, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 19–28, 2023, doi:
       10.11591/ijres.v12.i1.pp19-28.
[3]    I. A. Hassan, S. A. Ali, and H. K. Obayes, “Enhance iris segmentation method for person recognition based on image processing
       techniques,” Telkomnika (Telecommunication Computing Electronics and Control), vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 364–373, 2023, doi:
       10.12928/TELKOMNIKA.v21i2.23567.
[4]    E. Elyan et al., “Computer vision and machine learning for medical image analysis: recent advances, challenges, and way
       forward,” Artificial Intelligence Surgery, vol. 2, pp. 24–45, 2022, doi: 10.20517/ais.2021.15.
[5]    I. Castiglioni et al., “AI applications to medical images: From machine learning to deep learning,” Physica Medica, vol. 83,
       pp. 9–24, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.ejmp.2021.02.006.
[6]    Z. Sherkatghanad et al., “Automated detection of autism spectrum disorder using a convolutional neural network,” Frontiers in
       Neuroscience, vol. 13, 2020, doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.01325.
[7]    Y. Leitner, “The co-occurrence of autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children - What do we know?,” Frontiers
       in Human Neuroscience, vol. 8, no. 1, 2014, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00268.
[8]    F. Roudbarani, P. T. Modica, B. B. Maddox, Y. Bohr, and J. A. Weiss, “Clinician factors related to the delivery of psychotherapy
       for autistic youth and youth with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder,” Autism, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 415–427, 2023, doi:
       10.1177/13623613221106400.
[9]    S. G. Jacob, M. M. B. A. Sulaiman, and B. Bennet, “Algorithmic approaches to classify autism spectrum disorders: a research
       perspective,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 201, pp. 470–477, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2022.03.061.
[10]   Y. Du et al., “A new multimodality fusion classification approach to explore the uniqueness of schizophrenia and autism spectrum
       disorder,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 3887–3903, 2022, doi: 10.1002/hbm.25890.
[11]   N. Kumar and M. Nachamai, “Noise removal and filtering techniques used in medical images,” Oriental Journal of Computer
       Science and Technology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 103–113, 2017, doi: 10.13005/ojcst/10.01.14.
[12]   I. Oksuz, “Brain MRI artefact detection and correction using convolutional neural networks,” Computer Methods and Programs
       in Biomedicine, vol. 199, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2020.105909.
[13]   L. Griffanti et al., “ICA-based artefact removal and accelerated fMRI acquisition for improved resting state network imaging,”
       NeuroImage, vol. 95, pp. 232–247, 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.034.
[14]   G. Elaiyaraja, N. Kumaratharan, and T. C. S. Rao, “Fast and efficient filter using wavelet threshold for removal of gaussian noise
       from MRI/CT scanned medical images/color video sequence,” IETE Journal of Research, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 10–22, 2022, doi:
       10.1080/03772063.2019.1579679.
[15]   A. A. A. Al-Ameer, G. A. Hussien, and H. A. Al Ameri, “Lung cancer detection using image processing and deep learning,” Indonesian
       Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 987–993, 2022, doi: 10.11591/ijeecs.v28.i2.pp987-993.
[16]   S. Lylath and L. B. Rananavare, “Autism spectrum disorder identification with multi-site functional magnetic resonance
       imaging,” IAES International Journal of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 2141–2152, 2024, doi:
       10.11591/ijai.v13.i2.pp2141-2152.
[17]   M. Xu, V. Calhoun, R. Jiang, W. Yan, and J. Sui, “Brain imaging-based machine learning in autism spectrum disorder: methods
       and applications,” Journal of Neuroscience Methods, vol. 361, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2021.109271.
[18]   X. Song, N. -K. Chen, and P. Gaur, “Identification and attenuation of physiological noise in fMRI using kernel techniques,” in
       2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2011, pp. 4852–4855, doi:
       10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091202.
[19]   P. Gao et al., “Development and validation of a deep learning model for brain tumor diagnosis and classification using magnetic
       resonance imaging,” JAMA Network Open, vol. 5, no. 8, 2022, doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.25608.
[20]   H. M. Ali, “MRI medical image denoising by fundamental filters,” in High-Resolution Neuroimaging - Basic Physical Principles
       and Clinical Applications, 2018, doi: 10.5772/intechopen.72427.

           Advanced methodologies resolving dimensionality complications for autism … (Meenakshi Malviya)
1210                                                                                                          ISSN: 2252-8938

[21] S. Whitfield-Gabrieli and A. Nieto-Castanon, “Conn: A functional connectivity toolbox for correlated and anticorrelated brain
     networks,” Brain Connectivity, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 125–141, 2012, doi: 10.1089/brain.2012.0073.
[22] B. Sen, N. C. Borle, R. Greiner, and M. R. G. Brown, “A general prediction model for the detection of ADHD and autism using
     structural and functional MRI,” PLoS ONE, vol. 13, no. 4, 2018, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194856.
[23] W. S. Ahmed and A. A. A. Karim, “The impact of filter size and number of filters on classification accuracy in CNN,” 2020
     International Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering (CSASE), Duhok, Iraq, 2020, pp. 88-93, doi:
     10.1109/CSASE48920.2020.9142089.
[24] N. Kanemaru, H. Takao, S. Amemiya, and O. Abe, “The effect of a post-scan processing denoising system on image quality and
     morphometric analysis,” Journal of Neuroradiology, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 205–212, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.neurad.2021.11.007.
[25] S. Shrivastava, U. Mishra, N. Singh, A. Chandra, and S. Verma, “Control or autism - classification using convolutional neural
     networks on functional MRI,” in 2020 11th International Conference on Computing, Communication and Networking
     Technologies (ICCCNT), 2020, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/ICCCNT49239.2020.9225506.
[26] H. Wang et al., “Identifying autism spectrum disorder from multi-modal data with privacy-preserving,” NPJ Mental Health
     Research, vol. 3, no. 1, 2024, doi: 10.1038/s44184-023-00050-x.
[27] O. L. Usman, R. C. Muniyandi, K. Omar, and M. Mohamad, “Gaussian smoothing and modified histogram normalization
     methods to improve neural-biomarker interpretations for dyslexia classification mechanism,” PLoS ONE, vol. 16, no. 2, 2021, doi:
     10.1371/journal.pone.0245579.
[28] Y. Behzadi, K. Restom, J. Liau, and T. T. Liu, “A component based noise correction method (CompCor) for BOLD and perfusion
     based fMRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 90–101, 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.04.042.
[29] R. W. Cox, “AFNI: What a long strange trip it’s been,” NeuroImage, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 743–747, 2012, doi:
     10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.056.
[30] D. G. Wakeman and R. N. Henson, “A multi-subject, multi-modal human neuroimaging dataset,” Scientific Data, vol. 2, no. 1,
     2015, doi: 10.1038/SDATA.2015.1.
[31] R. Pauli, A. Bowring, R. Reynolds, G. Chen, T. E. Nichols, and C. Maumet., “Exploring fMRI results space: 31 variants of an
     fMRI analysis in AFNI, FSL, and SPM,” Frontiers in neuroinformatics, vol. 10, no. 24, 2016.



BIOGRAPHIES OF AUTHORS

                             Meenakshi Malviya                     is a research scholar in the Department of Computer
                             Science, Christ, which is deemed to be a University in Bangalore, India. She is an M.Phil. in
                             the domain of “Down syndrome classification using machine learning”. Her M.CA. from
                             Osmania University, Hyderabad, India in 2012, and B.CA. from Indira Gandhi National Open
                             University (IGNOU), India in 2006. She is a diploma holder in Computers Post Graduate
                             Diploma in Computer Application (PGDCA) in 2002. She has been awarded the best student
                             innovation award 2024 by IIHM, India, for her current Ph.D. proposal. She has ten years of
                             academic experience. She has 6 publications–3 international conferences (Scopus indexed),
                             2 book chapters, and 1 patent. She has attended four international conferences, 3 webinars, and
                             4 workshops. She can be contacted at email: meenakshimalviya@res.christuniversity.in.


                             Dr. Chandra Jayaraman                    is presently working as a Professor in the Department
                             of Computer Science at Christ Deemed to be University. She is also a founder and
                             membership chair for the Christ University ACM Student Chapter and a conference chair for
                             ICSST and ICSAC. Her areas of interest are medical image processing, neuro imaging, EEG
                             classification, multi-model development, and predictive model building in various fields like
                             business intelligence and business analytics. Social media mining and text analysis. She is the
                             owner of 5 Indian patents and one copyright. She has authored and co-authored over 165
                             research papers in international journals (SCI/SCIE/ESCI/Scopus) and conferences, including
                             IEEE, Springer, Elsevier conference proceedings, book chapters and articles. She is a member
                             in various professional bodies like IEEE, ACM, IETE, Biomedical Engineering, and Soft
                             Computing Society ISTM. She has given many guest lectures and keynote speakers and is a
                             resource person for QIP/FDP. She is also a reviewer and technical committee member in
                             various international conferences. She is an external committee member in BOS/Staff
                             selection/BOE in various institutes and universities. She guided more than 6 scholars,
                             including Ph.D. and M.Phil. She is currently guiding 6 Ph.D. scholars in computer science and
                             data science and is also in editorial member in Frontiers Medical Journal for international
                             publications. She can be contacted at email: chandra.j@christuniversity.in.




Int J Artif Intell, Vol. 14, No. 2, April 2025: 1201-1210
