                                                                                                     www.nature.com/scientificreports




                OPEN              Multiscale gradients of
                                  corticopontine structural
                                  connectivity
                                  Paul-Noel Rousseau1, Pierre-Louis Bazin2 & Christopher J. Steele1,3,4
                                  The cerebellum’s involvement in a range of cognitive, emotional, and motor processes has become
                                  increasingly evident. Given the uniformity of the cerebellar cortex’s cellular architecture its
                                  contributions to varied processes are thought be partially mediated by its patterns of reciprocal
                                  connectivity with the rest of the brain. A better understanding of these connections is therefore
                                  fundamental to disentangling the cerebellum’s contribution to cognition and behavior. While these
                                  connections have been studied extensively in non-human animals using invasive methods, we have
                                  limited knowledge of these connections in humans. The current work reconstructed the corticopontine
                                  projection, the first segment of downstream connections between the cerebral and cerebellar cortices,
                                  with diffusion MRI tractography in human in-vivo whole brain data and an independent higher
                                  resolution postmortem brainstem dataset. Dimensionality reduction was used to characterize the
                                  pattern of connectivity of cerebral cortical projections to the pons as two overlapping gradients that
                                  were consistent across participants and datasets: medial to lateral and core to belt. Our findings align
                                  with invasive work done in animals and advance our understanding of this connection in humans –
                                  providing valuable context to a growing body of cerebellar research, offering insights into impacts of
                                  damage along the pathway, and informing clinical interventions.

                                  Keywords Corticopontine, Cerebellum, Pons, Tractography, Gradients

                                  The historical paradigm of the cerebellum as being a motor control structure has been upended by evidence
                                  highlighting its involvement in a range of cognitive and emotional processes1,2. The cytoarchitecture of the
                                  cerebellar cortex is relatively uniform compared to that of the cerebral cortex, effectively being comprised of
                                  the same computational units repeated along its surface3,4. This suggests its contributions are at least partially
                                  mediated by its pattern of reciprocal connectivity with the cerebral cortex3. Accurate characterization of
                                  cerebellar connectivity is therefore fundamental to disentangling its roles in cognition and behavior and has
                                  potential implications for clinical interventions5,6. The first segment of downstream connections between the
                                  cerebral and cerebellar cortices, the corticopontine projection, has been extensively studied in non-human
                                  animals using invasive methods7–10 but almost completely overlooked in humans.
                                     Based on studies conducted in non-human animals, corticopontine projections are characterized by
                                  convergence and divergence: disparate cerebral cortical areas project to distinct and fractured patches within
                                  the pontine nuclei. Patches are organized in a lamellar fashion, reminiscent of the layers of an onion. Projections
                                  originating in sensorimotor areas terminate in a central core interspersed with passing corticospinal fibers
                                  and terminations from adjacent cortical regions form external layers11. Superimposed on this onion-like
                                  organization, cortical areas anterior to sensorimotor cortex project medially whereas more posterior cortical
                                  areas project laterally11. There is also a rostrocaudal organization, wherein motor areas project preferentially to
                                  the caudal pons and association areas to the rostral pons3. We can conceptualize these patterns as reflecting three
                                  overlapping spatial gradients of connectivity: core-belt, medial-lateral, and rostrocaudal gradients.
                                     Region-of-interest approaches have been used to investigate corticopontine connectivity in humans12–15.
                                  While these approaches have demonstrated general spatial mappings between the cerebral cortex and the
                                  cerebral peduncle (an intermediate segment of the corticopontine pathway) and pons, discrete regions of interest
                                  undercut the more nuanced nature of these connections apparent in the non-human animal literature. Other
                                  work has applied non-linear dimensionality reduction techniques to diffusion weighted imaging tractography
                                  data to delineate fine-grained gradients of connectional topography of different cortical regions16,17. Similar
                                  approaches have been used in resting state functional connectivity to characterize gradients of functional

                                  1Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada. 2Full brain picture Analytics, Leiden, The

                                  Netherlands. 3School of Health, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada. 4Department of Neurology, Max Planck
                                  Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. email: paul.rousseau@mail.mcgill.ca


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                 1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  organization18–20. They utilize nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques (e.g., diffusion-map embedding,
                                  spectral embedding) to generate lower-dimensional and overlapping representations of high-dimensional
                                  data that encapsulate the dominant modes/gradients of connectivity across space20,21,17. Given the nature of
                                  corticopontine projections, with their overlapping organizational principles, patterns of segregation and
                                  integration, gradient methods are ideally suited to disambiguating these principles in neuroimaging data.
                                      We hypothesized that human corticopontine projections would follow analogous organizational principles
                                  to those identified in non-human animals across both scales of dMRI data and on the individual and group
                                  levels. Specifically, we expected to find these projections to be organized in a core-belt, and medial-to-lateral
                                  fashion9,11. Given the inability of dMRI tractography to resolve terminations within the pons22, we did not
                                  expect to find a rostro-caudal organization. To investigate the organizational principles of the corticopontine
                                  pathway in humans we used diffusion MRI tractography and spectral embedding in two complementary
                                  datasets: a set of participants from the Human Connectome Project23and a single high-resolution acquisition of
                                  postmortem human brainstem24. The Human Connectome Project data allowed for investigation of individual
                                  participant level data and the creation of group averages while the complementary high-resolution sample
                                  served as a more granular confirmation of the organizational principles identified in the in-vivo data. With
                                  both datasets we (1) generated connectivity fingerprints within the pons that represent the patterns of cerebral
                                  cortical projections and then (2) projected the fingerprints to the cortical surface (in-vivo data) or the cerebral
                                  peduncle (postmortem data) for visualization. To further compare across the two sets of results we projected the
                                  in-vivo pontine gradients along the entire corticopontine tractogram.

                                  Materials and methods
                                  In-Vivo dataset
                                  Participants
                                  10 unrelated participants (5 females, average age = 29.7) were randomly selected from a dataset used in our
                                  previous study25 that employed T1w and diffusion weighted imaging data from the Human Connectome Project
                                  open-access dataset (www.humanconnectome.org)23,26,27. Individual IDs of participants from the dataset will
                                  be provided by the authors upon reasonable request. Informed consent for each participant was obtained by
                                  the HCP Washington University - University of Minnesota Consortium and all methods were performed in
                                  accordance with the relevant guidelines of the Washington University Institutional Review Board (IRB).
                                  Structural imaging data were acquired on a 3 T Siemens Connectom Skyra scanner. T1w (0.7 mm iso, TI/TE/TR
                                  = 1000/2.14/2400 ms, FOV = 224 × 224 mm) and diffusion weighted imaging (1.25 mm iso, TE/TR = 89.5/5520
                                  ms, FOV = 210 × 180 mm, multiband 3, b-values = 1000/2000/3000 s/mm2, 90 diffusion directions across each
                                  b-value). Ten participants were used due to the large computational demands of the tractography procedure
                                  implemented in the present study.

                                  dMRI Preprocessing
                                  Diffusion weighted images were obtained preprocessed by the HCP data processing pipeline23. Preprocessing steps
                                  included intensity normalization, distortion estimation and correction and a gradient nonlinearity correction.
                                  Diffusion weighted images were aligned to the T1w structural images with a rigid body transformation. MRtrix3
                                  29was used to obtain fiber orientation distribution function (fODF) images that were derived with constrained

                                  spherical convolution to perform probabilistic tractography29,30.

                                  Corticopontine tractography
                                  Our tractography approach (pipeline depicted in Fig. 1a) involved seeding small parcels (i.e., ROIs) distributed
                                  across the cerebral cortical surface and performing tractography between each of these parcels and the pons
                                  on a parcel-by-parcel basis. This approach was designed to minimize spurious connections, reduce the impact
                                  of tractography biases, and to ensure that each area of the cerebral cortex projected a comparable number of
                                  completed streamlines directly to the pons. The alternative, wherein the entire cerebral cortex is seeded in one
                                  step, would result in an over-representation of streamlines from easier to track regions (i.e. regions with a more
                                  linear trajectory to the pons and regions that are closer to the pons)31.

                                  Generation of subcortical ROIs
                                  Generation of Subcortical ROIs.
                                      Hand-drawn regions of interest (ROIs) of the left and right pons and cerebral peduncle for each of the
                                  participants were manually created by PNR using MRtrix3’s mrview and the T1-weighted and overlaid fODF
                                  images30,28. Mrview was also used to manually delineate exclusion ROIs: a sagittally oriented plane at the midline
                                  spanning the corpus collosum (to prevent tracking of fibers to the contralateral cortical hemisphere), coronally
                                  orientated plane immediately posterior to the pons (to prevent the tracking of fibers of the middle cerebral
                                  peduncle), a small axial region posterior to the middle cerebral peduncle and covering the ascending white
                                  matter tracts (i.e. medial lemniscus). An anatomical atlas of the brainstem and cerebellum was used as reference
                                  for the delineation of all ROIs of interest and exclusion32.

                                  Generation of cerebral cortex ROIs
                                  The cerebral cortical surface was generated from the T1w images with the Freesurfer pipeline (7.3.2) as presented
                                  in detail in our previous work25. All analyses were conducted on the left-hemisphere. The boundary between the
                                  cerebrum’s grey matter and white matter was converted to a single-voxel thick volume and then subdivided into
                                  ROIs of the frontal, somatosensory, parietal, insular, and cingular cortices. These served as the base ROIs that
                                  were further subdivided for subsequent tractography. Occipital and temporal cortices were excluded based on


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                 2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Fig. 1. Processing pipelines, including relevant software packages for the individual participant analysis (A),
                                  group analysis (B), and postmortem analysis (B).



                                  previous tract tracing studies in macaques indicating very few white matter projections to the pons from these
                                  regions33. Freesurfer’s white matter parcellation (wmparc) was used to generate ROIs of lobar white matter to be
                                  used as exclusion ROIs in the cortical lobar specific tractography. The single-voxel thick cortical lobar volumes
                                  were subdivided into small and approximately equally sized and contiguous parcels using Nighres’ intensity_
                                  propagation, which grew each parcel from voxel seeds distributed uniformly across the lobar volumes34. The
                                  total number of parcels across the frontal, somatosensory, parietal, insular and cingular cortices was set to 500.
                                  A total of 500 parcels was selected to balance between the spatial specificity of the subsequent parcel specific
                                  corticopontine tractography, while keeping the computational demands low enough that tractography could
                                  complete within a reasonable amount of time. To prevent tracking of invalid streamlines that originate in the
                                  seeded parcel and travel to other areas of the cortical white matter surface, a large exclusion ROI consisting of all
                                  other white matter surface ROIs was generated for each parcel.

                                  Cerebral cortex parcel to pons tractography
                                  Probabilistic tractography was performed between each of the cerebral cortical parcels and the left pons, with
                                  the cerebral peduncle set as an intermediary inclusion ROI. Tractography was performed with Mrtrix3’s tckgen28
                                  using the following parameters: iFOD2 algorithm, 1000 completed streamlines, maximum length of 150 mm,
                                  step size of 0.625 mm, maximum angle of 45 degrees between steps, initiation, and termination FOD amplitude
                                  threshold of 0.1. Tractography was performed independently for the frontal, somatosensory, parietal, insular and
                                  cingular cortices and resulted in an approximately equal distribution of streamlines across the cortical surface.
                                  This approach allowed for the inclusion of lobe-specific exclusion ROIs to minimize the amount of tracking of
                                  spurious streamlines between cerebral cortices and the pons. Frontal parcels included exclusion ROIs of parietal

Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                   3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  white matter, and parietal parcels included exclusion ROIs of frontal white matter to prevent tracking of superior
                                  longitudinal fasciculus fibers. The strict definition of exclusion ROIs was necessary due to the longer maximum
                                  streamline length that was used as a requirement to connect more distant regions of the cerebral cortex and the
                                  pons.

                                  Spectral embedding
                                  For each participant we created individual single voxel parcellations of the pons (where each voxel received
                                  a unique index label) that were combined with the 500-node cortical parcellations used in the tractography.
                                  The resultant node parcellation image was used along with the tractography results (combined across all
                                  cortical parcels) to generate a connectome matrix with MRtrix3’s tck2connectome. Individual cells in the matrix
                                  represented the number of streamlines connecting pairs of parcels (cortex-pons, cortex-cortex, pons-pons). This
                                  matrix was further constrained to remove cortex-cortex and pons-pons connections prior to spectral embedding
                                  to ensure that our results were specific for cortex-pons connections. In order to mitigate the effect of spurious
                                  connections on subsequent spectral embedding the connectivity matrix was thresholded such that pons parcels
                                  that received less than 10 streamlines were excluded from the analysis.
                                      Spectral embedding was then used to construct gradients representing the connectivity of the cerebral
                                  cortex and the pons, similar to previous work16,17. Scikit-learn’s SpectralEmbedding function was used to
                                  perform spectral embedding on the streamline connectivity matrix35. Briefly, the algorithm first transforms
                                  the connectivity matrix to an affinity matrix that represents the similarity in streamline connectivity between
                                  pairs of pons nodes. Spectral decomposition was then performed on the corresponding graph Laplacian, similar
                                  to the procedure adopted by Blazquez Freches and colleagues16,17and the top four gradients that represented
                                  the dominant patterns of corticopontine connectivity were extracted. Based on our hypothesis that we could
                                  identify two gradients within the pons, we analyze and interpret the first two gradients. For completeness we also
                                  visually inspected the third and fourth gradients - finding that they contained much more noise and were more
                                  inconsistent in their spatial patterns across individuals. For each gradient, each of the nodes within the pons
                                  receives a value along a continuous gradient based on the similarity of its connectivity to the cortex compared
                                  to other pons nodes, which we remapped to range between 1 and 10 to facilitate display as in previous work.
                                  To project gradients back to the cerebral cortex and visualize the spatial correspondence between the pons and
                                  cortical gradients, we performed the dot product of the embedding values within the pons and the original pons
                                  by cerebral cortex connectivity matrix, and then again remapped the values between 1 and 10. The approach of
                                  weighing a connectivity matrix by embedding values has previously been described by others who applied the
                                  same general method to gradients derived from functional connectivity19,36,37. The final result was that each of
                                  the 500 cerebral cortical parcels received a value that represents a weighted average (by number of streamlines)
                                  of the embedding values of connected pons voxels. This effectively allows us to visualize spatial changes in
                                  corticopontine connectivity patterns across the cerebral cortical surface. The cerebral cortical projections were
                                  viewed on the Freesurfer white matter surface for each participant.

                                  Group analysis
                                  Individual participants’ data were combined to generate group embeddings in a template space based on HCP
                                  data38,39. In brief, the group template was generated from 1001 participants from the Human Connectome
                                  Project23. As described by Tremblay and colleagues38, a subset of 200 participants were used to generate an
                                  initial fODF based template using MRtrix3’s population_template function and then individual participant data
                                  were registered to template space using mrregister. The fODFs were used to drive registration within white matter
                                  to prioritize white matter correspondence and ensure that alignment was not unduly influenced by grey matter
                                  cortical differences.
                                      For the group analysis in the present study, the ten participant space corticopontine tractograms from the
                                  individual participant analysis were transformed to group space with tcktransform using the warps generated
                                  from the fODF registration (pipeline depicted in Fig. 1b). The average of all ten participants’ T1 weighted images
                                  was processed with Freesurfer’s recon-all pipeline to generate cortical surface segmentations as done previously
                                  at the individual level. The volumetric representation of the cortical surface (including frontal, parietal, insular
                                  and cingular cortices) was parcellated into 250 equally sized parcels using the same procedure as in the individual
                                  participant analysis. Because of the multiple transforms applied to the parcellation (see below), 250 parcels were
                                  used instead 500 to prevent the loss of parcels when transforming between group and individual spaces. A hand
                                  drawn ROI of the pons in group space was also created in the same manner as described above, and parcellated
                                  such that each voxel was assigned a unique label. In order to obtain a common cortical surface parcellation
                                  across participants, the parcellated cortical surface was transformed into individual subject space, dilated such
                                  that each voxel took on the value of the closest parcel (Nighres’ intensity_projection, 10 mm dilation), and then
                                  masked by the cortical gray/white matter interface volume and projected back into group space. The result
                                  was individual subject parcellations in group space that were unique to the subject (reflecting their cortical
                                  anatomy) but comparable across subjects because parcel indices were maintained and projected to/from the
                                  same anatomical location across subjects. For each subject we generated a group space connectivity matrix based
                                  on the unique but analogous cortical parcellations and the common parcellation of the pons. The resultant
                                  connectivity matrices were summed and thresholded such that pons parcels with fewer than 45 streamlines
                                  were excluded from the analysis. The threshold here was set so the resulting connectivity matrix would contain a
                                  comparable number of completed pons nodes to that in the individual participants analyses. Spectral embedding
                                  and cortical projection were performed on the group total connectivity matrix in the same manner as for the
                                  individual subject analyses.




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                  4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  Postmortem brainstem and thalamus dataset
                                  Data acquisition and preprocessing
                                  A preprocessed postmortem diffusion imaging dataset of the human brainstem and thalamus from a 65-year-old
                                  male was obtained from a previous study by Sitek and colleagues24. The acquisition of the original dataset40 was
                                  approved by the Duke University Health System Institutional Review Board, and all methods were performed
                                  in accordance with relevant guidelines. Tissue preparation, MRI acquisition, and preprocessing parameters are
                                  described in detail by the authors. In summary, 3D-gradient echo and diffusion weighted Magnetic resonance
                                  imaging data was collected on a small-bore Magnex/Agilent scanner. Diffusion-weighted images were acquired
                                  with 200 μm spatial resolution (120 diffusion directions at b = 4000 s/m2, TR = 100 ms, TE = 33.6 ms, FOV = 90
                                  × 55 × 45 mm). DIPY 0.14 was used to was used to obtain fiber orientation distribution function (fODF) images
                                  that were derived with constrained spherical convolution.

                                  Tractography
                                  Probabilistic tractography was performed between hand drawn ROIs of the left cerebral peduncle and left pons.
                                  Due to the incompatibility of the older version of DIPY ODF images with MRtrix3, SCILPY tools (​ ​​h​tt​ ​p​s​:​/​/​g​i​t​h​
                                  u​b​.​c​o​m​/​s​c​il​ ​u​s​/​s​c​i​l​p​y​​​​)​ were used to perform tractography on the postmortem dataset (post-mortem pipeline is
                                  depicted in Fig. 1c). Seeding was performed in the cerebral peduncle (1000 seeds per voxel, step size 0.1 mm),
                                  with an inclusion ROI in the left pons and a large exclusion ROI surrounding the pons and cerebral peduncle.
                                  Following the generation of the initial tractogram, the ROI of the cerebral peduncle was then parcellated into
                                  500 approximately equal sized parcels using Nighres intensity_projection and the oversampled tractogram was
                                  then filtered with MRtrix3 tckedit function such that each parcel included 200 randomly selected completed
                                  streamlines. This procedure assured that each parcel in the cerebral peduncle projected an equal number of
                                  streamlines to the pons.

                                  Spectral Embedding and Cerebral Peduncle Projection
                                  To reduce computational load and facilitate comparison at similar spatial resolutions, instead of the voxel-wise
                                  pons parcellation used in the in-vivo analysis, the pons ROI was parcellated into 1000 equally sized parcels using
                                  Nighres intensity_propagation. Mrtrix3’s tck2connectome function was then used to obtain a connectivity matrix
                                  that included the number of streamlines between each of the parcels in the cerebral peduncle and pons. The
                                  resultant matrix was constrained to only contain the pons to cerebral peduncle connections (not pons-pons or
                                  peduncle-peduncle). Spectral embedding, and projection of embedded values in pons to the cerebral peduncle
                                  were performed using the same procedure as in the in-vivo analyses.

                                  Whole tractogram projection of in-vivo pons gradients
                                  In order to evaluate the correspondence between the in-vivo and postmortem gradients, we also implemented
                                  an additional approach to project in-vivo pontine gradients along a group average tractogram. This allows for
                                  the inspection of in-vivo gradients along the entire corticopontine tractogram, including in axial slices of the
                                  cerebral peduncle that are comparable to the postmortem analysis. We first combined all individual participant
                                  tractograms in average space and then filtered them to include only streamlines traversing the cerebral cortical
                                  surface, the cerebral peduncle, and the pons. We also used a hand drawn shell around the pons to exclude any
                                  stray streamlines exiting the pons towards the MCP. A subset of 100,000 streamlines were randomly selected to
                                  reduce computational load and facilitate display. Dipy’s values_from_volume function was used to project the
                                  average of the embedding values from all voxels in the pons traversed by each streamline onto the streamline
                                  for display. The result is a single value per streamline representing the average of the embedding values in the
                                  pons voxels it passes through. Mrview was then used to display the tractogram with streamlines color coded
                                  according to the range of average embeddings.

                                  Results
                                  In-vivo: corticopontine connectivity gradients
                                  Corticopontine tractography and spectral embeddings were successfully completed in 9 of the 10 HCP datasets.
                                  In one participant gradient results were discrepant with the rest, specifically there was greater noise evident
                                  in the second gradient and it did not contain continuous transitions seen in other participant’s gradients. This
                                  appeared to be driven by anomalies in their tractography that resulted in streamlines originating in sensorimotor
                                  cortex entering the pons in a more diffuse manner in comparison to other participants. For the 9 successfully
                                  completed participants, the first two components reflected a (1) medial to lateral and (2) core to belt gradients
                                  when viewed in an axial plane close to the centre of the pons (Fig. 2a). There was remarkable consistency in
                                  the gradients across participants. The first component was a medial to lateral gradient for all but one of the
                                  participants, where the order of components was reversed. The medial to lateral gradient, did not show a smooth
                                  gradation, but was primarily dominated by two zones (medial and lateral) with a small area of gradation between
                                  the two. This indicates that the connectivity showed strong segregation between streamlines traveling to the
                                  medial and lateral parts of the pons. The core to belt gradient was more variable across participants with some
                                  displaying more of a banded gradient, as opposed to more of a concentrically organized gradient (for instance
                                  participants 6 and 9). The central area of this gradient corresponds well with regions of the pons occupied by the
                                  corticospinal fibres, which is in agreement with tract tracing work in non-human primates33.The group analysis
                                  reflected very similar medial to lateral and core to belt gradients found in the individual participants (Fig. 2b).
                                      When projected back to the cerebral cortex, the medial to lateral pontine gradient appears as an anterior
                                  to posterior gradient (Fig. 2a). In most participants, there is limited gradation within the frontal and parietal
                                  lobes and a more pronounced gradation starting at the motor cortex and extending posteriorly. This parallels


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                   | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                              5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Fig. 2. Spectral embedding results and cerebral cortex projection for individual HCP participants (A) and the
                                  group average (B). Results show first two components of spectral embedding in an axial slice in the middle of
                                  the pons and the associated cerebral cortical projections on the left white matter surface.



                                  our observations of the spectral embedding within the pons and may indicate that convergence of cerebral
                                  cortical streamlines in the pons results in a loss of spatial specificity. In the cerebral cortex, the core to belt
                                  pontine gradient appears as a gradient radiating outward from primary motor cortex. This illustrates good
                                  correspondence with the results in the pons, in which the core of the gradient appears to be dominated by
                                  corticospinal fibers. The cerebral cortical gradient projection in the group data showed similar results (Fig. 2b),
                                  albeit with smoother gradations compared to the gradients of the individual participants. We noted missing data
                                  in one of the cerebral cortex parcels in the dorsal aspect of the post-central gyrus. After group registration, this
                                  parcel did not have any streamlines connecting to the it the pons, resulting in a null value for the dot-product
                                  at this node.

                                  Postmortem: cerebral peduncle to pons connectivity gradients
                                  In the postmortem data, we observed two very similar gradients to those identified in the in-vivo analysis
                                  (Fig. 3). When viewed in an axial slice in the center of the pons, the first component reflected a medial to lateral
                                  gradient, and the second a core-belt gradient. Compared with the in-vivo results, the medial to lateral gradient
                                  exhibited finer gradation, and was angled more obliquely. This more oblique configuration is partially the result
                                  of the postmortem sample being oriented in such a way that the pons was more closely aligned to the vertical
                                  axis than in the in-vivo data. In the core to belt gradient, the core was smaller and more circumscribed compared
                                  to the in-vivo results, likely reflecting increased spatial specificity because of higher resolution and decreased
                                  partial voluming. When projecting the first gradient to the cerebral peduncle, we observed an oblique anterior
                                  to posterior gradient. In combination with the in-vivo results reflecting an anterior to posterior gradient, these
                                  findings highlight the lateral twisting of corticopontine fibres as they transition through the internal capsule,
                                  the cerebral peduncle, and enter the pons41,42. When projecting the second, core-belt, gradient to the cerebral
                                  peduncle we observed a core-belt gradient whose centre was in a lateral and inferior portion of the cerebral
                                  peduncle – corresponding well with the cortical sensory motor projections previously identified by Ramani and
                                  colleagues15.

                                  Projection of in-vivo pontine gradients
                                  The projection of the pontine gradients along the whole tractogram and in axial slices in the cerebral
                                  peduncle and internal capsule is depicted in Fig. 4. In the cerebral peduncle, we confirmed a strikingly similar
                                  topographical organization of gradients to the postmortem data. With the first gradient oriented on the axis
                                  intermediate to the medial-lateral and anterior-posterior axes observed within the pons and cerebral cortical
                                  projections, respectively. The second gradient was also remarkably similar to the cerebral peduncle projection


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                  6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Fig. 3. Spectral embedding results and cerebral peduncle projection for postmortem brainstem dataset.
                                  Figure depicts first two components of spectral embedding in an axial slice in the middle of the pons and the
                                  associated cerebral peduncle projections.



                                  in the postmortem data, though exhibiting a somewhat larger central zone that is likely a result of summing
                                  across multiple participants’ individual data. When inspecting the projection of the first gradient in the internal
                                  capsule, the medial portion of the pons is projected to uniformly from a large segment of the anterior limb of
                                  the external capsule that extends slightly past the genu. The central zone of the second in-vivo pons gradient
                                  projects to a circumscribed area posterior to the genu, corresponding well with the area of the internal capsule
                                  demonstrated to contain passing corticospinal fibres41.

                                  Discussion
                                  We reconstructed the corticopontine pathway using diffusion MRI and tractography in two complementary
                                  datasets with different levels of resolution; demonstrating topographic patterns of organization similar to those
                                  observed in non-human animal work. Our work is the first to use a data-driven decomposition approach, as
                                  opposed to region of interest, to characterize the corticopontine pathway in humans and demonstrates two
                                  gradients of connectivity that capture core organizational principles. In the pons, we demonstrate both medial to
                                  lateral and core-belt connectivity gradients that are present in both the in-vivo and postmortem high-resolution
                                  datasets. In the in-vivo data, the medial to lateral gradient corresponded to an anteroposterior gradient in the
                                  cerebral cortex whereas the core-shell gradient corresponded to a cerebral cortical gradient radiating anteriorly
                                  and posteriorly from primary motor cortex. We also projected the in-vivo gradients along the entire tractogram
                                  to confirm that our two datasets shared the same spatial organization within a region that was common to both,
                                  the cerebral peduncle, and explore the organization of connectivity within the internal capsule.
                                      The first gradient, accounting for the largest proportion of the variability in the connectivity data, was
                                  organized in a medial to lateral fashion in the pons. In the in-vivo data set, cerebral cortical areas anterior to
                                  the central sulcus project preferentially to the medial pons, whereas areas posterior to the central sulcus project
                                  more laterally. This configuration (medial to lateral mapping in pons corresponding to an anterior to posterior
                                  mapping in the cerebral cortex) may reflect in part the lateral rotation of corticopontine fibers as they traverse
                                  the internal capsule and enter the cerebral peduncle. The observed organization in the pons is consistent with
                                  and extends the findings of invasive lesion and tract tracing work in macaques that shows frontal cortical areas
                                  projecting medially in the pons and parietal areas projecting more laterally3,11,43. Within the pons, we observed
                                  uniform lateral, central, and medial zones or bands as opposed to a smooth gradation in our in-vivo results.
                                  Previous tract tracing work indicates that corticopontine fibers from different cerebral cortical areas terminate
                                  in discontinuous patches within the pons3,43,44. The patches representing terminations from frontal, sensory-
                                  motor, and parietal areas follow the medial to lateral organization that we identified but also exhibit significant
                                  overlap3,43. Our observations of more clearly demarcated regional projections are likely a function of the lower
                                  resolution of the in-vivo dMRI data and convergence of cerebral cortical streamlines on the small cross section
                                  in the pons – both resulting in lower spatial specificity than tract tracing. Importantly and supporting this


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                 7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Fig. 4. Projection of in-vivo pontine gradients along the corticopontine tractogram. On the left is a three-
                                  dimensional representation of the color-coded group sum tractogram. The middle depicts the color-coded
                                  gradient projection in an axial slice in the cerebral peduncle, and on the right is the projection in an axial slice
                                  of the internal capsule. Streamlines were displayed with 75% opacity and a slab thickness of 1 mm.



                                  interpretation, the higher resolution postmortem dataset exhibited a smoother gradient that followed the same
                                  medial to lateral organization (Fig. 3) and helps to serve as a mesoscale bridge between in-vivo dMRI and tract
                                  tracing results.
                                      The secondary core-belt gradient that we observed reflects a funnel-like convergence of projections originating
                                  from across the cortical mantle onto the pons. Here we observed a prominent central zone in the pons that, when
                                  projected back to the cortex, corresponded to primary motor and somatosensory cortex. The spatial extent of the
                                  projection of this central zone was broadly consistent across individual participants (including primary motor
                                  cortex in all), however in some individuals it was highly circumscribed on primary motor cortex and in others
                                  included somatosensory and/or premotor cortical areas. The position of the projection of this central zone to
                                  the cerebral peduncle in the postmortem dataset – along with its link to the primary motor cortex in our in-vivo
                                  results – is consistent with previous tractography-based parcellations of the sensorimotor projections15. It is likely
                                  that the white matter bundles circumscribed within this central zone in the pons consists of both corticospinal
                                  and corticopontine sensorimotor fibers. The corticopontine tracing and lesion work in non-human primates
                                  has demonstrated that fibers originating in sensorimotor cortex terminate in areas adjacent to corticospinal
                                  fibers11,33. At the resolutions used in the current study, we were unable to identify terminations within the
                                  pontine nuclei or differentiate between corticospinal and corticopontine fibers. Given that corticopontine fibers
                                  originate as corticospinal fibers early in development, they are likely in very close spatial correspondence and
                                  would be very difficult to differentiate with dMRI45.
                                      With dMRI we were limited to detecting gradients along the mediolateral and dorsoventral axes within the
                                  pons. Even at 250-micrometer resolution it is not feasible to resolve and differentiate corticopontine white matter
                                  and pontine nuclei gray matter with sufficient resolution to reliably detect termination of streamlines. As a result,
                                  we were unable to recapitulate another organizational principle within the pons that has been demonstrated in
                                  the animal literature: the termination of corticopontine fibers originating in non-sensory motor frontal and
                                  parietal areas in the rostral pons (i.e., superior aspect in the human brain) and termination inputs from sensory
                                  motor inputs in the caudal pons (inferior aspect)11,44,46. However, previous work has indirectly demonstrated
                                  this using dMRI tractography between the pons and motor and non-motor areas of the cerebellar cortex25, a
                                  finding that is corroborated by older post-mortem lesion work in humans47.
                                      Our analyses of the corticopontocerebellar pathway with dMRI tractography highlight important limitations
                                  in detecting streamline terminations along the rostrocaudal axis in the case of the corticopontine segment, and
                                  the mediolateral axis in the case of the pontocerebellar segment22. These limitations, in addition to the complex
                                  patterns of convergence and divergence of white matter along the whole corticopontocerebellar pathway,


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                    8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  emphasize the value of our approach of assessing corticopontine and pontocerebellar segments individually25.
                                  Reconstruction of the entire corticocerebellar connection in a single step with dMRI tractography (effectively
                                  representing this pathway as being monosynaptic), while algorithmically possible, results in a compounding of
                                  tractography biases and a lack of spatial specificity of resulting maps. In general, it stresses the value of a more
                                  conservative approach to tractography, like the one adopted here, that considers known anatomy while being
                                  mindful of limitations of the method48,49.
                                     Finally, it is increasingly clear that the pons doesn’t function as a simple relay from the cerebral cortex to
                                  the cerebellum, and that it likely serves a computational role that includes filtering and integration of cerebral
                                  cortical signals50. Our demonstration of overlapping structural gradients and, by extension, organizational
                                  principles within the pons, hints at substrates underlying integration of information from disparate cortical
                                  areas. Functional work has demonstrated areas in the cerebellum that correspond to the default mode network51,
                                  which may imply that there is integration of inputs from frontal and parietal default mode areas at some point
                                  along the corticocerebellar pathway. An overlap in the two gradients that we have observed, and in frontal
                                  and parietal inputs to the pons depicted in the core-belt gradient may reflect this integration at the level of the
                                  pons. Applying gradient decomposition to functional MRI data may shed further light on a possible integrative
                                  function of the pons. For instance, they may help situate how putative pontine functional connectivity gradients
                                  map onto well described cerebrocortical and cerebellar connectivity gradients18,20.

                                  Conclusion
                                  The corticopontine connection, the first step in the downstream pathway connecting the cerebral cortex and
                                  the cerebellum, has been studied extensively in non-human animals. Employing two diffusion MRI datasets at
                                  different levels of spatial resolution, anatomically grounded tractography, and data-driven gradient methods
                                  we are able to demonstrate analogous organizational principles to those seen in animal studies: results that
                                  were consistent across individuals and at different levels of granularity. This work informs our anatomical
                                  understanding of the corticopontine pathway in humans and lays the groundwork for future research studying
                                  more fundamental aspects of this connection and how it may be impacted by different normative and pathological
                                  processes.

                                  Data availability
                                  Analyses were conducted on publicly available datasets. In-vivo data comes from the Human Connectome Pro-
                                  ject (https://www.humanconnectome.org). The ex-vivo dataset comes from a prior publication (​​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
                                  r​g​/​1​0​.​7​5​5​4​/​e​L​i​f​e​.​4​8​9​3​2​) and is available at https://osf.io/c4 m82/. Code developed by the authors to perform
                                  analyses, as well as final maps in MNI space will be shared on the group’s github page at the time of publication
                                  (https://github.com/neuralabc).

                                  Received: 19 August 2024; Accepted: 2 May 2025


                                  References
                                   1. King, M., Hernandez-Castillo, C. R., Poldrack, R. A., Ivry, R. B. & Diedrichsen, J. Functional boundaries in the human cerebellum
                                      revealed by a multi-domain task battery. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1371–1378 (2019).
                                   2. Schmahmann, J. D. The cerebellum and cognition. Neurosci. Lett. 688, 62–75 (2019).
                                   3. Schmahmann, J. D., Guell, X., Stoodley, C. J. & Halko, M. A. The theory and neuroscience of cerebellar cognition. Annu. Rev.
                                      Neurosci. 42, 337–364 (2019).
                                   4. Walter, J. T. & Khodakhah, K. The linear computational algorithm of cerebellar purkinje cells. J. Neurosci. 26, 12861–12872 (2006).
                                   5. Baker, K. B. et al. Cerebellar deep brain stimulation for chronic post-stroke motor rehabilitation: a phase I trial. Nat. Med. 29,
                                      2366–2374 (2023).
                                   6. Wessel, M. J. & Hummel, F. C. Non-invasive cerebellar stimulation: a promising approach for stroke recovery?? Cerebellum 17,
                                      359–371 (2018).
                                   7. Brodal, P. & Bjaalie, J. G. Salient anatomic features of the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway. Prog Brain Res. 114, 227–249 (1997).
                                   8. Glickstein, M., May, I. I. I., Mercier, B. E. & J. G. & Corticopontine projection in the macaque: the distribution of labelled cortical
                                      cells after large injections of horseradish peroxidase in the Pontine nuclei. J. Comp. Neurol. 235, 343–359 (1985).
                                   9. Leergaard, T. B. & Bjaalie, J. G. Topography of the complete corticopontine projection: from experiments to principal maps. Front.
                                      Neurosci. 1, 211–223 (2007).
                                  10. Schmahmann, J. D. & Pandya, D. N. The cerebrocerebellar system. in International Review of Neurobiology (ed Schmahmann, J.
                                      D.) vol. 41 31–60 (Academic, (1997).
                                  11. Brodal, P. The corticopontine projection in the rhesus monkey. Origin and principles of organization. Brain 101, 251–283 (1978).
                                  12. Doron, K. W., Funk, C. M. & Glickstein, M. Fronto-cerebellar circuits and eye movement control: A diffusion imaging tractography
                                      study of human cortico-pontine projections. Brain Res. 1307, 63–71 (2010).
                                  13. Engelhardt, E., Moreira, D. M. & Laks, J. Cerebrocerebellar system and Arnold’s bundle - A tractographic study: preliminary
                                      results. Dement. Neuropsychol. 4, 293–299 (2010).
                                  14. Karbasforoushan, H., Tian, R. & Baker, J. There is a topographic organization in human cortico-pontine connectivity. Brain
                                      Commun. 4, fcac047 (2022).
                                  15. Ramnani, N. et al. The evolution of prefrontal inputs to the cortico-pontine system: diffusion imaging evidence from macaque
                                      monkeys and humans. Cereb. Cortex. 16, 811–818 (2006).
                                  16. Blazquez Freches, G. et al. Principles of Temporal association cortex organisation as revealed by connectivity gradients. Brain
                                      Struct. Funct. 225, 1245–1260 (2020).
                                  17. Blazquez Freches, G., Haak, K. V., Beckmann, C. F. & Mars, R. B. Connectivity gradients on tractography data: pipeline and
                                      example applications. Hum. Brain. Mapp. 42, 5827–5845 (2021).
                                  18. Guell, X., Schmahmann, J. D., Gabrieli, J. D. & Ghosh, S. S. Functional gradients of the cerebellum. Elife 7, e36652 (2018).
                                  19. Katsumi, Y. et al. Correspondence of functional connectivity gradients across human isocortex, cerebellum, and hippocampus.
                                      Commun. Biol. 6, 1–13 (2023).
                                  20. Margulies, D. S. et al. Situating the default-mode network along a principal gradient of macroscale cortical organization. Proc. Natl.
                                      Acad. Sci. U S A. 113, 12574–12579 (2016).


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                    | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                                     9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  21. Belkin, M. & Niyogi, P. Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral techniques for embedding and clustering. in Proceedings of the 15th
                                      International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems: Natural and Synthetic 585–591 (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
                                      USA, 2001).
                                  22. Lundell, H. & Steele, C. J. Cerebellar imaging with diffusion magnetic resonance imaging: approaches, challenges, and potential.
                                      Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 56, 101353 (2024).
                                  23. Glasser, M. F. et al. The human connectome project’s neuroimaging approach. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1175–1187 (2016).
                                  24. Sitek, K. R. et al. Mapping the human subcortical auditory system using histology, postmortem MRI and in vivo MRI at 7T. eLife
                                      8, e48932 (2019).
                                  25. Rousseau, P. N., Chakravarty, M. M. & Steele, C. J. Mapping pontocerebellar connectivity with diffusion MRI. NeuroImage 119684
                                      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119684 (2022).
                                  26. Steele, C. J. & Chakravarty, M. M. Gray-matter structural variability in the human cerebellum: Lobule-specific differences across
                                      sex and hemisphere. Neuroimage 170, 164–173 (2018).
                                  27. Van Essen, D. C. et al. The human connectome project: a data acquisition perspective. Neuroimage 62, 2222–2231 (2012).
                                  28. Tournier, J. D. et al. MRtrix3: A fast, flexible and open software framework for medical image processing and visualisation.
                                      NeuroImage 202, 116137 (2019).
                                  29. Tournier, J. D., Calamante, F. & Connelly, A. Robust determination of the fibre orientation distribution in diffusion MRI: non-
                                      negativity constrained super-resolved spherical Deconvolution. Neuroimage 35, 1459–1472 (2007).
                                  30. Tournier, J. D., Calamante, F., Connelly, A. & MRtrix Diffusion tractography in crossing fiber regions. Int. J. Imaging Syst. Technol.
                                      22, 53–66 (2012).
                                  31. Girard, G., Whittingstall, K., Deriche, R. & Descoteaux, M. Towards quantitative connectivity analysis: reducing tractography
                                      biases. NeuroImage 98, 266–278 (2014).
                                  32. Naidich, T. P. et al. Duvernoy’s Atlas of the Human Brain Stem and Cerebellum (Springer, 2009). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​oi​ ​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​10​ ​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-2​ ​1​
                                      1​-​7​3​9​7​1​-​6​​​​
                                  33. Schmahmann, J. D., Rosene, D. L. & Pandya, D. N. Motor projections to the basis Pontis in rhesus monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 478,
                                      248–268 (2004).
                                  34. Huntenburg, J. M., Steele, C. J. & Bazin, P. L. Nighres: processing tools for high-resolution neuroimaging. GigaScience 7, giy082
                                      (2018).
                                  35. Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011).
                                  36. Guell, X. et al. Functional territories of human dentate nucleus. Cereb. Cortex. 30, 2401–2417 (2020).
                                  37. Zhang, J. et al. Intrinsic functional connectivity is organized as three interdependent gradients. Sci. Rep. 9, 15976 (2019).
                                  38. Tremblay, S. A. et al. MVComp toolbox: MultiVariate Comparisons of brain MRI features accounting for common information
                                      across metrics. 02.27.582381 Preprint at (2024). https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.27.582381 (2024).
                                  39. Zayed, A., Iturria-Medina, Y., Villringer, A., Sehm, B. & Steele, C. J. Rapid Quantification of White Matter Disconnection in the
                                      Human Brain. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 1701–1704 (2020). (2020).
                                  40. Calabrese, E. et al. Postmortem diffusion MRI of the human brainstem and thalamus for deep brain stimulator electrode
                                      localization. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 3167–3178 (2015).
                                  41. Ross, E. D. Localization of the pyramidal tract in the internal capsule by whole brain dissection. Neurology 30, 59–64 (1980).
                                  42. Sullivan, E. V., Zahr, N. M., Rohlfing, T. & Pfefferbaum, A. Fiber tracking functionally distinct components of the internal capsule.
                                      Neuropsychologia 48, 4155–4163 (2010).
                                  43. Koziol, L. F. et al. Consensus paper: the cerebellum’s role in movement and cognition. Cerebellum 13, 151–177 (2014).
                                  44. Schmahmann, J. D. & Pandya, D. N. Anatomic organization of the Basilar Pontine projections from prefrontal cortices in rhesus
                                      monkey. J. Neurosci. 17, 438–458 (1997).
                                  45. Heffner, C. D., Lumsden, A. G. & O’Leary, D. D. Target control of collateral extension and directional axon growth in the
                                      mammalian brain. Science 247, 217–220 (1990).
                                  46. Wiesendanger, R., Wiesendanger, M. & Ru¨egg, D. G. An anatomical investigation of the corticopontine projection in the primate
                                      (Macaca fascicularis and Saimiri sciureus)—II. The projection from frontal and parietal association areas. Neuroscience 4, 747–765
                                      (1979).
                                  47. Beck, E. The origin, course and termination of the prefronto-pontine tract in the human brain. Brain 73, 368–391 (1950).
                                  48. Rheault, F., Poulin, P., Caron, A. V., St-Onge, E. & Descoteaux, M. Common misconceptions, hidden biases and modern challenges
                                      of dMRI tractography. J. Neural Eng. 17, 011001 (2020).
                                  49. Schilling, K. G. et al. Limits to anatomical accuracy of diffusion tractography using modern approaches. NeuroImage 185, 1–11
                                      (2019).
                                  50. Schwarz, C. & Thier, P. Binding of signals relevant for action: towards a hypothesis of the functional role of the Pontine nuclei.
                                      Trends Neurosci. 22, 443–451 (1999).
                                  51. Buckner, R. L., Krienen, F. M., Castellanos, A., Diaz, J. C. & Yeo, B. T. T. The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by
                                      intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 2322–2345 (2011).

                                  Author contributions
                                  Conceptualization (PNR, CJS, PLB), Formal analysis(PNR, CJS), Funding acquisition (PNR, CJS), Investiga-
                                  tion(PNR, CJS), Methodology(PNR, CJS, PLB), Validation(PNR, CJS, PLB), Visualization (PNR, CJS), Data
                                  curation (CJS), Project administration (CJS), Resources (CJS), Software (CJS), Supervision (CJS), Writing –
                                  original draft(PNR, CJS), Writing – review & editing (PNR, CJS, PLB).

                                  Declarations

                                  Competing interests
                                  The authors declare no competing interests.

                                  Additional information
                                  Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.-N.R.
                                  Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
                                  Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                                  institutional affiliations.




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                         | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                                                          10
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
                                  permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
                                  appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and
                                  indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s
                                  Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included
                                  in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
                                  exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy
                                  of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

                                  © The Author(s) 2025




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:16399                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-00886-7                                                 11
