                                                                                                      www.nature.com/scientificreports




                OPEN              Spatial neglect after subcortical
                                  stroke may reflect cortico-cortical
                                  disconnection
                                  Christoph Sperber1, Hannah Rosenzopf1, Max Wawrzyniak2, Julian Klingbeil2,
                                  Dorothee Saur2 & Hans-Otto Karnath1
                                  Spatial neglect is commonly attributed to lesions of a predominantly right-hemispheric cortical
                                  network. Although spatial neglect was also repeatedly observed after lesions to the basal ganglia and
                                  the thalamus, many anatomical network models omit these structures. We investigated if disruption of
                                  functional or structural connectivity can explain spatial neglect in subcortical stroke. We retrospectively
                                  investigated data of first-ever, acute stroke patients with right-sided lesions of the basal ganglia
                                  (n = 27) or the thalamus (n = 16). Based on lesion location, we estimated (i) functional connectivity
                                  via lesion-network mapping with normative resting state fMRI data, (ii) structural white matter
                                  disconnection using a white matter atlas and (iii) tract-wise disconnection of association fibres based
                                  on normative tractography data to investigate the association of spatial neglect and disconnection
                                  measures. Apart from very small clusters of functional disconnection observed in inferior/middle frontal
                                  regions in lesion-network symptom mapping for basal ganglia lesions, our analyses found no evidence
                                  of functional or structural subcortico-cortical disconnection. Instead, the multivariate consideration
                                  of lesion load to several association fibres predicted the occurrence of spatial neglect (p = 0.0048;
                                  AUC = 0.76), which were the superior longitudinal fasciculus, inferior occipitofrontal fasciculus,
                                  superior occipitofrontal fasciculus, and the uncinate fasciculus. Disconnection of long (cortico-cortical)
                                  association fibres can explain spatial neglect in subcortical stroke. Like the competing theory of
                                  remote cortical hypoperfusion, our finding does not support a genuine role for subcortical grey matter
                                  structures in spatial neglect.

                                  Keywords Thalamus, Basal ganglia, White matter, Hemineglect, Attention, Lesion network mapping

                                  Abbreviations
                                  CoC 	Centre of Cancellation
                                  IOF	inferior occipitofrontal fasciculus
                                  rs-fMRI	Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging
                                  SLF	superior longitudinal fasciculus
                                  SOF	superior occipitofrontal fasciculus
                                  UF	uncinate fasciculus

                                  Spatial attention deficits are a typical and debilitating consequence of right hemispheric stroke. The syndrome
                                  of spatial neglect, with an egocentric core deficit of an attentional deviation towards the ipsilesional side and
                                  neglect of contralesional objects1,2, impacts stroke outcome and activities of daily living3,4. Several theories have
                                  been proposed to explain the cognitive processes behind spatial neglect (see, e.g1,5–7)., and extensive research has
                                  been dedicated to uncovering its neural foundations. The last two decades saw a shift from theories that focussed
                                  on single cortical loci in the right hemisphere, for example within the inferior parietal lobe8,9, the superior
                                  or middle temporal lobes10,11, and the inferior frontal lobe12,13, to cortical network theories that unified these
                                  previous findings to various degrees1,2,14. This development was stimulated by advances in the accessibility of the
                                  human brain connectome and new insights into the impact of white matter disconnection on spatial neglect15–21.
                                      Infarcts in the thalamus and the basal ganglia were also repeatedly implicated in spatial neglect22–24. A few
                                  theories incorporated such structures based on subcortico-cortical connections with cortical key regions of
                                  spatial neglect10,25–27 or multimodal connectivity data28, but subcortical grey matter structures only play a niche


                                  1Center of Neurology, Division of Neuropsychology, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of

                                  Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. 2Department of Neurology, Neuroimaging Laboratory, University of Leipzig,
                                  04103 Leipzig, Germany. email: Karnath@uni-tuebingen.de


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                   1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  role in current network theories of spatial neglect. The functional role of subcortical grey matter structures is
                                  also challenged by an alternative explanation of spatial neglect after subcortical stroke that emphasizes the role of
                                  cortical hypoperfusion. In acute stroke with large vessel occlusion, hypoperfusion typically goes beyond the core
                                  lesion area visible in diffusion-weighted MRI and includes areas where perfusion is sufficient to sustain tissue
                                  integrity but insufficient to sustain neural activity29,30. In basal ganglia stroke, hypoperfusion and functional
                                  underactivation in cortical areas such as the superior temporal gyrus, the inferior parietal lobule, and the inferior
                                  frontal gyrus31 can explain spatial neglect31,32.
                                      Yet another alternative account likewise dismisses the functional role of subcortical grey matter structures
                                  and explains spatial neglect after subcortical stroke with the disconnection of long association fibre tracts18,33,34,
                                  i.e. intrahemispheric cortico-cortical long-range white matter connections. Indeed, the disconnection of
                                  several major fibre bundles has been implicated in spatial neglect15,16,18,19,35. These fibre bundles are located in
                                  the subcortical white matter directly adjacent to the thalamus and basal ganglia. Hence, even when a lesion of
                                  subcortical grey matter structures falls largely into the grey matter, it may still include damage to white matter
                                  fibre bundles which might suffice to cause spatial neglect through cortico-cortical disconnection.
                                      In the current study, we aimed to re-evaluate the possible causes of spatial neglect in acute subcortical
                                  stroke using state-of-the-art analyses of indirect connectivity estimation. We studied patients whose lesions
                                  focussed on subcortical grey matter structures, without damage to cortical structures, and, at most, minor white
                                  matter damage. First, we used functional lesion-network symptom mapping, an approach to assess functional
                                  brain networks affected by focal structural lesions to gain insight into the possible role of subcortico-cortical
                                  connectivity. Second, we evaluated structural brain connectivity, including subcortico-cortical disconnection
                                  estimated based on normative connectome data. Third, we estimated the cortico-cortical disconnectome
                                  of each patient on the level of major fibre bundles to evaluate a possible role of cortico-cortical white matter
                                  disconnection.

                                  General methods
                                  Patient recruitment and behavioural assessment
                                  We re-analysed data of stroke patients admitted to the Centre of Neurology at the University of Tübingen.
                                  Patients were retrospectively identified in datasets collected in previous studies11,23,36–38. All patients had a first-
                                  ever unilateral cerebral stroke to the right hemisphere confirmed by CT or MRI imaging. Patients with a medical
                                  history of a neurological or psychiatric disease that could interfere with the neuropsychological assessment as
                                  well as patients with diffuse lesions or tumours were excluded. Selection criteria were: (1) stroke affecting the
                                  basal ganglia or the thalamus, (2) no visible damage to cortical areas, and (3) no or only minor damage to white
                                  matter (average white matter lesion volume was 1.9 ± 2.25 cm³; range = 0.0–10.8 cm³). These criteria were first
                                  liberally checked by an automated search across available datasets by reference to the AICHA brain atlas39. A
                                  second, visual evaluation of the neuroimaging of potentially suitable datasets resulted in a sample of 43 stroke
                                  patients. Demographic and clinical data are shown in Table 1; lesion topographies in Fig. 1. The original studies
                                  that collected clinical data as well as the re-analysis of the data were approved by the local ethics board and have
                                  been performed in accordance with the revised Declaration of Helsinki. Patients or their relatives gave their
                                  informed consent for participation in the study.
                                      Spatial neglect was assessed with pencil and paper cancellation tests presented on sheets of paper measuring
                                  21 cm x 29.7 cm. In the letter cancellation task40 60 target letters ‘A’ are embedded among distractor letters; in
                                  the bells cancellation task41 35 bell-shaped black symbols are shown among other similarly depicted distractor
                                  objects. The sheets were placed horizontally and their centre was aligned with the patient’s sagittal midline.
                                  Patients were instructed to cancel all target items with the pencil. No time limit was set and the assessment
                                  was completed after the patient had confirmed twice that they were satisfied with the performance. To quantify
                                  performance with a continuous measure, we computed the Centre of Cancellation (CoC)42 using freely available
                                  software (https://github.com/neurolabusc/Cancel). The CoC predicts the typical neurological signs of spatial
                                  neglect and ranges from − 1 (maximum neglect of right stimuli) to 0 (symmetrical test performance) up to 1
                                  (maximum neglect of left stimuli). Briefly, this measure refers to the mean horizontal position of all successfully


                                  Patient Group                  All           BG stroke, Neg+   BG stroke, Neg-   Thalamus stroke, Neg+   Thalamus stroke, Neg-
                                  N                              43            10                17                4                       12
                                  Age                            64.0 (12.7)   66.5 (17.4)       60.4 (11.1)       72.0 (9.1)              64.3 (11.1)
                                  Sex (F/M)                      15/28         6/4               3/14              2/2                     4/8
                                  Aetiology
                                                                 34/9          9/1               16/1              0/4                     9/3
                                  (ischemia/haemorrhage)
                                  Lesion volume (ml)             4.70 (5.20)   9.46 (7.64)       4.06 (3.95)       4.09 (1.34)             1.84 (1.49)
                                  Lesion to examination (days)   4.7 (4.8)     6.0 (6.1)         4.4 (4.4)         8.8 (6.2)               2.6 (2.1)
                                  Lesion to imaging (days)       2.3 (4.1)     3.3 (4.6)         2.0 (2.4)         9.5 (13.4)              1.0 (1.8)
                                  Neglect severity (CoC)         0.16 (0.27)   0.50 (0.31)       0.01 (0.02)       0.36 (0.22)             0.00 (0.01)
                                  Hemiparesis (%)                77            88                64                100                     78


                                  Table 1. Clinical and demographic data of all patients. Demographic data with ‘mean (standard deviation)’.
                                  BG = basal ganglia; Neg + = patients with Spatial neglect; Neg- = patients without Spatial neglect; coc = centre
                                  of cancellation (Rorden and Karnath, 2010).


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                     | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                            2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Fig. 1. Lesion anatomy. Overlap topographies of structural lesion maps.



                                  cancelled targets relative to the midline of the page, which is defined to have a horizontal coordinate of 0. The
                                  average CoC score of both the letter and bells cancellation tests was used as the measure of spatial neglect
                                  severity. For analyses with binary data, patients were classified as suffering from spatial neglect if the CoC in at
                                  least one of the two cancellation tasks was above the empirically established cut-offs42. For 7 patients, only the
                                  measurement in one of the two cancellation tests was available, and this was used as the sole measure.

                                  Imaging and lesion segmentation
                                  Structural brain imaging was acquired by clinical CT (n = 30) or MRI (n = 13) on average 2.3 ± 4.1 days after
                                  stroke onset. In patients with an available MRI, diffusion-weighted imaging was used in the first 48 h after
                                  stroke onset and T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging afterwards. Part of the data included in the
                                  present study reached back to times before digitalization of imaging data. For 25 of such older cases, lesions were
                                  manually drawn on axial slices of the ch2 MNI T1 template in MRIcron11, and interpolated in the z-direction

Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                  3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  as described previously37. For the remaining 18 cases, lesions were delineated semi-automatically on axial slices
                                  of the clinical scan using the Clusterize Toolbox43. If possible, images were co-registered with high-resolution
                                  T1 MRI. Scans were warped to 1 × 1 × 1 mm³ MNI coordinates using age-specific templates in the Clinical
                                  Toolbox44, situation-dependently either using cost-function masking or enantiomorphic normalisation. The
                                  normalisation parameters were then applied to the lesion masks.

                                  Lesion-network symptom mapping based on normative rs-fMRI data
                                  We mapped the whole-brain functional connectivity of each lesion with ‘lesion-network mapping’45. In this
                                  approach, only the patients’ lesion masks are needed, and the brain-wide disturbance caused by a lesion is
                                  determined by reference to normative resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) of a healthy control group (Fig. 2).
                                  In short, the binary lesion mask of each patient is used as a seed in a rs-fMRI analysis. For each patient, the
                                  correlation of spontaneous resting brain activity within voxels inside the seed area is computed for all healthy
                                  control subjects for each voxel in the brain. This results in a single, full-brain lesion-network topography per
                                  patient, indicating both positive and negative functional connectivity with the lesioned area, which can be
                                  used within common statistical topographic approaches to map the brain-wide disruption of the functional
                                  connectome. For our study, this method has significant advantages over the direct measurement of functional
                                  connectivity: firstly, it allows statements to be made about the connectivity of the damaged tissue − which is no
                                  longer possible with direct methods − and secondly, it is widely applicable, as it only relies on data that is already
                                  recorded as part of standard clinical protocols. The procedures followed previous studies46 and utilised public
                                  rs-fMRI data of 100 healthy young subjects. The detailed procedures are described in the supplementary.
                                      We utilised patient-wise maps of averaged Fisher-transformed Pearson correlations of rs-fMRI as lesion-
                                  network maps. For statistical analyses, we have masked the full-brain lesion-network maps to only include
                                  cerebral cortical grey matter areas with the AICHA brain atlas39, henceforth termed cortical lesion-network
                                  maps. The masking step removed white matter areas and subcortical brain structures, i.e. the thalamus and basal
                                  ganglia, effectively removing areas where autocorrelation of resting state activity inside the lesion seed maps
                                  would inflate lesion-network connectivity.

                                  Estimated structural disconnectivity profiles
                                  We indirectly estimated the lesion-induced disconnection of white matter fibres by reference to a healthy
                                  reference streamline connectome. Our method closely resembled the estimation of white matter disconnection
                                  in a popular toolkit47, but extended this approach to the level of individual streamlines. We loaded all lesion
                                  masks as regions of interest to DSI studio (https://dsi-studio.labsolver.org/) and tracked streamlines based on the
                                  HCP84248 intersecting the lesion mask. The resulting set of streamlines included both streamlines that terminated
                                  in the lesion mask, i.e. disrupted connections of the subcortical structures themselves, and streamlines that
                                  passed the lesion mask, which included cortico-cortical streamlines.

                                  Tract-wise lesion load
                                  We assessed the tract-wise lesion load of several long association (i.e. cortico-cortical) fibre tracts that were
                                  previously found to be implicated in spatial neglect15,19,21,36,49 and which, due to proximity to subcortical




                                  Fig. 2. Concept lesion-network mapping. Design of the lesion network mapping analysis.


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                    4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  structures, may be disrupted in subcortical stroke. These included the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), the
                                  inferior occipitofrontal fasciculus (IOF), the superior occipitofrontal fasciculus (SOF), and the uncinate fasciculus
                                  (UF). We defined the location of these fibre tracts with a histology-based probabilistic cytoarchitectonic fibre
                                  tract atlas50. We created a binary region of interest for each tract by binarisation of the probabilistic map at p ≥ 0.3
                                  (the cut-off was derived from previous literature19. The lesion load of a fibre tract was defined as the proportional
                                  overlap of the lesion map with this binarised map. While such overlap maps do not necessarily represent the
                                  proportion of disconnected fibres, they were found (for motor deficits after damage to the corticospinal tract)
                                  not only to predict motor outcome but also to have higher predictive value than lesion volume51. In a control
                                  condition, we accounted for the full probabilistic information of the fibre tract atlas. We computed the weighted
                                  lesion load with the entire (non-thresholded) probabilistic fibre tract and the lesion map, whereas the lesion load
                                  of each voxel was weighted by its probability to be part of the fibre tract and summed up.

                                  Multivariate prediction analysis on tract-wise lesion load
                                  We used a random forest classifier to evaluate if multivariate tract-wise lesion load can predict spatial neglect
                                  (methodologically similar to52). We trained random forests with the scikit-learn package in Python to predict
                                  the binary spatial neglect diagnosis based on the four tract-wise lesion load measures. Each random forest
                                  contained 100 trees and, to prevent over-fitting, we limited the maximum depth to 3 and the minimum number
                                  of samples required to split an internal node to 5. We assessed the out-of-sample classifier performance in
                                  a looped cross-validation with 100 stratified splits of the total sample into 80% training and 20% test data.
                                  Classification performance was assessed in the test data by the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver
                                  operator characteristic. We tested the classification performance against chance level by permutation testing.
                                  For 2500 times, we randomly shuffled the target variable and re-computed a random forest with the same
                                  procedures as for the original data. With this procedure, we assessed the distribution of the AUC under the
                                  null hypothesis and estimated the statistical significance of the original model. We also planned to repeat the
                                  multivariate random forest classification analysis with the indirectly estimated streamline-wise disconnectivity
                                  profiles aggregated for the major cortico-cortical fibre bundles based on the HCP84248. To do so, we derived
                                  patients’ tract disconnection measures using the lesion quantification toolkit47.

                                  Experiment 1: lesion network symptom mapping
                                  Experimental design and statistical analysis
                                  First, we used frequentist statistical parametric mapping to identify subcortico-cortical lesion-network
                                  connectivity related to spatial neglect after stroke to either the basal ganglia or the thalamus. We computed
                                  voxel-wise general linear models using NiiStat (https://github.com/neurolabusc/NiiStat) to test the association
                                  between spatial neglect severity as measured by average CoC scores and indirectly estimated connectivity in
                                  cortical lesion-network maps. Family-wise correction for multiple comparisons was implemented by maximum
                                  statistic permutation thresholding at p < 0.05 (two-tailed) with 10,000 permutations. We interpreted the results
                                  with the rs-fMRI-based AICHA atlas39.
                                      Second, we replicated the analysis with a Bayesian approach with Bayes factor mapping to gain insights
                                  into evidence for the null hypothesis h0 and statistical power. We used the Bayesian Lesion-Deficit Inference
                                  toolbox53 with a design equivalent to the frequentist analysis. Bayesian general linear models tested if an
                                  association between cortical lesion-network connectivity and spatial neglect exists in two-sided tests against the
                                  null hypothesis that no such association exists. For voxels without evidence for an association between spatial
                                  neglect and lesion networks, it can differentiate between the absence of evidence, i.e. a lack of statistical power,
                                  and evidence for the null hypothesis. We classified the degree of evidence provided by the mapped Bayes factors
                                  according to established conventions54.

                                  Results
                                  The frequentist analyses failed to find cortical lesion-network correlates of spatial neglect after correction for
                                  multiple comparisons both for basal ganglia and thalamic stroke.
                                      For basal ganglia stroke, the Bayesian analysis (Fig. 3A) was, as expected53, more liberal and found scattered
                                  clusters of evidence for lesion network-neglect associations (i.e. Bayes Factors [BF] > 3, meaning that h1 is at
                                  least 3 times more likely than h0). However, the level of evidence was mostly only moderate and clusters were
                                  very small, creating largely non-interpretable results. We found a single small, potentially interpretable cluster
                                  in the right inferior and middle frontal gyrus (in regions 20 and 30 in the AICHA atlas), albeit maximum BFs
                                  did not exceed 12. On the other hand, due to the small sample size, the Bayesian analysis was unable to provide
                                  evidence in favour of the null hypothesis (BF < 1/3). Hence, we sub-differentiated BFs that suggested no evidence
                                  for any hypothesis (BFs > 1/3 and < 3) into anecdotal evidence for h1 (BF > 1 and < 3) and anecdotal evidence for
                                  h0 (BF < 1 and > 1/3; see54). Anecdotal evidence for h0 was found in the majority of tested voxels (74.1%) and
                                  comprised large parts of the right cerebral cortex, including most of the temporal and parietal lobes.
                                      For thalamic stroke, the Bayesian analysis found anecdotal evidence for h0 across the majority of tested
                                  voxels (97.9%; Fig. 3B) and no interpretable clusters of voxels with evidence for h1.

                                  Experiment 2: structural disconnectivity profile analysis
                                  Experimental design and statistical analysis
                                  We only tested streamlines disconnected in at least 5 patients, resulting in 88781 for basal ganglia lesions and
                                  25873 streamlines for thalamic lesions (for a visualisation, see Supplementary Fig. 3). We tested the association
                                  of streamline disconnection with the mean CoC score with general linear models corrected by a permutation-
                                  based family-wise error correction with 10000 permutations at p < 0.05. The tests were one-tailed because we


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                     5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Fig. 3. Results of the Bayesian lesion-network mapping analysis. (A) Statistical results of the Bayesian voxel-
                                  wise lesion-network analysis with normative rsfMRI data for basal ganglia stroke and (B) thalamic stroke. The
                                  analyses resulted in Bayes factors that weigh the evidence for the alternative hypothesis h1 (i.e. an association
                                  between the voxel-wise lesion-network connectivity and spatial neglect exists) and the null hypothesis h0
                                  (i.e. no such association exists). For visualization, we binned these Bayes factors according to common
                                  conventions54 into evidence in favour of h1 (red; moderate BF > 3, strong BF > 10, very strong BF > 30), and
                                  inconclusive, anecdotal evidence for h1 (yellow; BF > 1) anecdotal evidence for h0 (turquoise; BF < 1). Due to
                                  the small sample sizes, the smallest Bayes factor was 0.35 (i.e. > 1/3), hence no moderate or stronger evidence
                                  for h0 was found. See supplementary Fig. 2 for results not restricted to the cortical grey matter, i.e. also
                                  covering white matter and subcortical areas.



                                  expected that neural damage would be associated with more severe, not less severe, deficits. To assign significant
                                  streamlines to major fibre tracts we used the recognize and cluster function in DSI Studio.

                                  Results
                                  In basal ganglia stroke, we found a small set of 12 streamlines in the corticostriatal tract (Fig. 4A) where
                                  disconnection was significantly associated with spatial neglect. The identified streamlines appear to connect the
                                  putamen (AICHA region 366 in39) and a portion of the superior frontal gyrus (AICHA region 4 and 14) in the
                                  right hemisphere. In thalamic stroke (Fig. 4B), disconnection of 141 streamlines in the right corticospinal tract,

Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  as well as a single streamline each from the right anterior thalamic radiation, right fornix, and the right dentato-
                                  rubro-thalamic tract were observed.

                                  Experiment 3: white matter tract-wise analysis
                                  Experimental design and statistical analysis
                                  With the third experiment, we investigated if spatial neglect can be explained by damage to white matter
                                  fibre tracts that pass in close proximity to the basal ganglia and thalamus. First, we assessed the association
                                  between tract-wise lesion load and spatial neglect. As the analysis focussed on cortico-cortical disconnection –
                                  independent of the subcortical lesion site in either the basal ganglia or thalamus – we performed analyses for all
                                  43 patients combined. However, to improve comparability with analyses 1 and 2, we also report results for basal
                                  ganglia and thalamic stroke patients separately. Second, we used the random forest classifier to evaluate to what
                                  degree tract-wise lesion load can explain spatial neglect. In contrast to the simple tract-wise lesion load analysis,
                                  the random forest classification could not be repeated for the patient groups separately, since the overall sample
                                  size would be too small.

                                  Results
                                  We found a lesion load in at least one of the four fibre tracts in 28 out of 43 patients. This was the case for 12 out
                                  of 15 patients with spatial neglect and 12 out of 29 patients without spatial neglect. This ratio was significantly
                                  larger in patients with spatial neglect (χ2(1, N = 43) = 3.88; p = 0.049). For all four fibre tracts, at least some
                                  patients with a lesion load were identified ranging from 13 to 23 patients (Fig. 5). The rank correlation between
                                  the mean CoC score and the lesion load in each fibre tract ranged from τ = 0.20 to 0.27. However, while the
                                  correlation coefficients were significant for all fibres except the SLF, no results remained significant after
                                  Bonferroni correction. The correlation between the total lesion load across the four fibre tracts and the mean
                                  CoC was highly significant (τ = 0.31; p = 0.005; Fig. 5), the correlation remained significant when only patients
                                  with damage to the basal ganglia were included (τ = 0.32; p = 0.023), but not for the thalamic stroke patient
                                  sample (τ = 0.24; p = 0.27). In a control analysis, we looked at the weighted lesion load that incorporated the full
                                  probabilistic information of the fibre tract atlas. This analysis closely replicated the correlation between lesion
                                  load and mean CoC (τ = 0.32; p = 0.003). The out-of-sample prediction accuracy of the random forest classifier
                                  was highly significant above chance (p = 0.0048; AUC = 0.76), meaning that the multivariate consideration of
                                  tract-wise disconnection can predict spatial neglect in subcortical stroke.
                                      We aimed to repeat the multivariate classification with the estimated streamline-wise disconnectivity across
                                  major cortico-cortical fibre bundles based on the HCP84248. However, not only the known neglect-related
                                  association fibre bundles (see above) were rarely or never disconnected, but association fibres in general.
                                  Disconnection of the SLF was found in only 2 patients. Only the IOF and the UF were more often found to be
                                  disconnected. Hence, we deemed the data to be unfit for multivariate model training.

                                  Discussion
                                  Our study investigated whether indirectly estimated functional or structural disconnection can explain spatial
                                  neglect in acute subcortical stroke to either the basal ganglia or the thalamus. Neither a functional analysis – i.e.,
                                  lesion network mapping using normative resting-state fMRI – nor a structural analysis – i.e., the estimation of
                                  white matter disconnection using a normative streamline atlas – found convincing evidence for subcortico-




                                  Fig. 4. Streamline disconnections associated with neglect severity. (A) Significant disconnections of
                                  streamlines found in basal ganglia lesions. All fibres found were classified as part of the corticostriatal tract and
                                  are depicted in orange. (B) Significant disconnections in thalamic lesions. These included the corticospinal
                                  tract (yellow), anterior thalamic radiation (red), fornix (green) and dentatorubrothalamic tract (blue).


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                    7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Fig. 5. Results of the tract-wise analysis.(A) Scatter plots show the tract-wise lesion load for patients with
                                  and without spatial neglect, respectively (B) the relationship between total tract-wise lesion load and neglect
                                  severity.



                                  cortical connectivity that could explain spatial neglect. However, we identified disconnection of cortico-cortical
                                  fibres that pass the subcortical structures in close proximity as a possible cause of spatial neglect.
                                      The first analysis used lesion network mapping to evaluate possible disruption of functional subcortico-
                                  cortial connectivity underlying spatial neglect after subcortical stroke. Voxel-wise univariate mapping failed to
                                  identify significant contributions of lesion network connectivity to spatial neglect. Moreover, Bayesian analyses
                                  partially provided anecdotal evidence for the absence of any association between lesion-network connectivity
                                  and spatial neglect in several known cortical key areas of spatial neglect. If anything, our analyses indicate
                                  functional connectivity of the basal ganglia with inferior/middle frontal due to very small clusters observed in
                                  these regions. However, due to the small sample sizes, we could not find at least moderate evidence in favour of
                                  the null hypothesis.
                                      The second analysis estimated disconnection of white matter fibre streamlines to evaluate possible disruption
                                  of structural subcortico-cortial connectivity. In basal ganglia stroke, cortical projections of fibres more often
                                  affected in neglect patients were located in the right superior frontal gyrus, i.e. more superiorly than those
                                  frontal regions commonly associated with spatial neglect (namely, the right ventrolateral frontal cortex35). In
                                  thalamic stroke, the results were almost exclusively limited to the corticospinal tract. We consider this to be a
                                  coincidental finding unrelated to spatial neglect but linked to the high rate of additional hemiparesis (Table 1).
                                  In summary, neither of the first analyses provided convincing evidence of disconnectivity between subcortical
                                  and cortical regions to underlie spatial neglect.
                                      The third analysis estimated the lesion load of cortico-cortical white matter tracts using a probabilistic atlas
                                  of white matter bundles. The multivariate consideration of lesion load to several association fibres by the random
                                  forest classifier predicted the occurrence of spatial neglect in cross-validation. This suggests that disconnection
                                  of cortico-cortical long association fibres situated in proximity of the basal ganglia and thalamus, namely the
                                  SLF, IOF, SOF, and the UF, could be a cause of spatial neglect in subcortical stroke. However, the same analysis of
                                  disconnectivity profiles created with a non-probabilistic streamline atlas was not possible, as this method rarely
                                  or never captured disconnection of most of the potentially relevant fibres. At first glance, it may seem surprising
                                  that this simple analysis has yielded a positive finding. But there are good reasons that can explain this finding.
                                  Firstly, the spatial definition of white matter fibres varies markedly across atlases, especially between atlases
                                  derived from histological versus from diffusion-tensor imaging data55. Secondly, the histological atlas, which
                                  was used in the analysis with positive findings, is a probabilistic atlas, i.e. it represents inter-individual variation
                                  in the location of fibre bundles. Disconnection of cortico-cortical fibre bundles may occur in subcortical strokes
                                  depending on individual anatomy, in the sense that the fibre bundles are located inter-individually differently
                                  close to the basal ganglia and the thalamus and their disconnection is differently likely when the subcortical
                                  structures are damaged. It should be noted that the lesion load approach also has limitations. Relevant for the
                                  disconnection of a fibre tract is less the total lesion load than the disconnection of fibre bundles. More complex
                                  lesion load approaches attempt to take this into account56 and could yield better predictors, although our
                                  approach for the current study yielded positive findings and was therefore sufficient.
                                      Disconnection of long association fibres is a well-known cause of spatial neglect, as suggested by studies in st
                                  roke15,19,21,33,36,49, tumour resection57, and using electrical stimulation16. Several studies suggested disconnection
                                  of the SLF and the IOF as a cause of spatial neglect and found disconnection of these fibres to be linked to
                                  different attentional sub-deficits21,49. Intrasurgical electrical stimulation of the SOF was found to induce neglect-


Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                     8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  like deviations in a line bisection task16. Lesions to the UF were found to be linked to spatial neglect in chronic
                                  stroke patients36. The assumed relevance of these fibre bundles is consistent with the known correlates of spatial
                                  neglect in the grey matter as described in the introduction. The association fibre bundles connect the frontal,
                                  temporal, and parietal correlates of spatial neglect, which culminated in anatomical theories of spatial neglect
                                  that assume disturbances of a fronto-temporo-parietal network to cause spatial neglect1,2,14,35.
                                      Since aphasia and spatial neglect in humans are caused by damage to somewhat homologue networks in
                                  opposing hemispheres, the state of research on aphasia following subcortical grey matter lesions might help to
                                  put our current findings into context. Aphasia after basal ganglia damage in the left hemisphere also remains
                                  controversial with heterogeneous findings and a lack of consensus on the involvement of specific structures58.
                                  In line with the assumption of parallel mechanisms when considering our current results, white matter damage
                                  was found to be a potential explanation for the occurrence of aphasia in subcortical stroke59,60. Other studies
                                  suggested, for example, left hemispheric thalamocortical functional disconnection as a possible mechanism61.
                                  In our study, we did not find any results that would suggest similar mechanisms for spatial neglect after right-
                                  hemispheric thalamic stroke. However, we must note that our sample of right thalamic stroke cases (as opposed
                                  to right basal ganglia cases) was too small to draw or reject parallels with the explanation by Stockert and
                                  colleagues61.
                                      Some anatomical network models have attributed a direct anatomical role to the basal ganglia, the thalamus,
                                  or both in the evocation of spatial neglect. These models were based on findings from lesion studies in subcortical
                                  stroke in the context of existing knowledge about brain connections (e.g10,26).,. Other network models
                                  solely focused on cortico-cortical, intra- or interhemispheric networks and did not include any subcortical
                                  structures1,17. In line with these theories, disconnection of long association fibres subserving a right fronto-
                                  temporo-parietal network has been found to underlie spatial neglect15,16,18,19,35. According to our results, these
                                  theories about the general anatomy of spatial neglect may – at least in some cases – also explain spatial neglect
                                  after subcortical stroke. The possibility of such a mechanism underlying spatial neglect in subcortical stroke adds
                                  − in addition to remotely induced hypoperfusion in intact cortical regions following lesions of subcortical grey
                                  matter structures31 − yet another explanation that does not assume a direct role of subcortical structures in the
                                  spatial neglect network.
                                      Given contradicting findings (e.g28). and the possibility of multiple, parallel causal mechanisms, further
                                  studies are needed to understand the neural correlates of spatial neglect after subcortical stroke. This is of
                                  particular importance as null results in our study are of limited significance due to the relatively small sample
                                  size, as shown by the results of the Bayesian lesion network analysis. Bayesian statistics may be well suited for the
                                  analysis of small samples, as they transparently highlight any lack of evidence due to small sample or effect sizes.
                                  However, even though they are capable of indicating evidence in favour of the null hypothesis, Bayesian statistics
                                  typically require larger samples to gather evidence for h0 than for h162. Furthermore, even if a null effect was
                                  likely, a possible role of subcortical structures in spatial neglect could not be excluded. A possible multitude
                                  of causes for spatial neglect in subcortical stroke – cortical hypoperfusion31,32, cortico-cortical white matter
                                  disconnection, and a direct impact of damaged or disconnected subcortical structures – could statistically dilute
                                  an effect.
                                      In summary, our study suggests that disconnection of cortico-cortical fibre bundles can explain spatial neglect
                                  after subcortical stroke. This explanation does not contradict the assumption that remote cortical hypoperfusion
                                  caused by subcortical damage causes spatial neglect31,32. Both mechanisms seem plausible and, depending
                                  on the case, could underlie the occurrence of spatial neglect either separately or in combination. Apart from
                                  very small clusters of functional disconnection observed in inferior/middle frontal regions in lesion-network
                                  symptom mapping for basal ganglia lesions, our study found no evidence for the involvement of subcortico-
                                  cortical disconnection in the known network of spatial neglect. However, due to the small sample size in our
                                  study, we cannot exclude this possibility, and future studies with larger samples are needed to draw more precise
                                  conclusions on this question.

                                  Data availability
                                  The data of the current study are not publicly available due to the data protection agreement approved by the
                                  local ethics committee and signed by the participants. Reasonable requests concerning patient dats are to be
                                  addressed to HOK. Analysis scripts can be obtained from CS.

                                  Received: 6 November 2024; Accepted: 7 May 2025


                                  References
                                   1. Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Spatial neglect and attention networks. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 569–599 (2011).
                                   2. Karnath, H. O. & Rorden, C. The anatomy of Spatial neglect. Neuropsychologia 50, 1010–1017 (2012).
                                   3. Nijboer, T., van de Port, I., Schepers, V., Post, M. & Visser-Meily, A. Predicting functional outcome after stroke: the influence of
                                      neglect on basic activities in daily living. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 182 (2013).
                                   4. Moore, M. J., Vancleef, K., Riddoch, M. J., Gillebert, C. R. & Demeyere, N. Recovery of visuospatial neglect subtypes and
                                      relationship to functional outcome six months after stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 35, 823–835 (2021).
                                   5. Karnath, H. O. Spatial attention systems in Spatial neglect. Neuropsychologia 75, 61–73 (2015).
                                   6. Ptak, R. & Bourgeois, A. Disengagement of attention with Spatial neglect: A systematic review of behavioral and anatomical
                                      findings. Neurosci. Biobehav Rev. 160, 105622 (2024).
                                   7. Zebhauser, P. T., Vernet, M., Unterburger, E. & Brem, A. K. Visuospatial Neglect - a Theory-Informed overview of current and
                                      emerging strategies and a systematic review on the therapeutic use of Non-invasive brain stimulation. Neuropsychol. Rev. 29,
                                      397–420 (2019).
                                   8. Mort, D. J. et al. The anatomy of visual neglect. Brain 126, 1986–1997 (2003).



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                   | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                                   9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                   9. Chechlacz, M. et al. Separating neural correlates of allocentric and egocentric neglect: distinct cortical sites and common white
                                      matter disconnections. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 27, 277–303 (2010).
                                  10. Karnath, H. O., Ferber, S. & Himmelbach, M. Spatial awareness is a function of the Temporal not the posterior parietal lobe. Nature
                                      411, 950–953 (2001).
                                  11. Karnath, H. O., Fruhmann Berger, M., Küker, W. & Rorden, C. The anatomy of Spatial neglect based on Voxelwise statistical
                                      analysis: a study of 140 patients. Cereb. Cortex. 14, 1164–1172 (2004).
                                  12. Husain, M. & Kennard, C. Visual neglect associated with frontal lobe infarction. J. Neurol. 243, 652–657 (1996).
                                  13. Committeri, G. et al. Neural bases of personal and extrapersonal neglect in humans. Brain 130, 431–441 (2007).
                                  14. Lunven, M. & Bartolomeo, P. Attention and Spatial cognition: neural and anatomical substrates of visual neglect. Ann. Phys.
                                      Rehabil Med. 60, 124–129 (2017).
                                  15. De Thiebaut, M. et al. Damage to white matter pathways in subacute and chronic Spatial neglect: A group study and 2 single-case
                                      studies with complete virtual ‘in vivo’ tractography dissection. Cereb. Cortex. 24, 691–706 (2014).
                                  16. de Thiebaut, M. et al. Direct evidence for a parietal-frontal pathway subserving Spatial awareness in humans. Science 309, 2226–
                                      2228 (2005).
                                  17. Bartolomeo, P., Thiebaut de Schotten, M. & Doricchi, F. Left unilateral neglect as a Disconnection syndrome. Cereb. Cortex. 17,
                                      2479–2490 (2007).
                                  18. Doricchi, F., Thiebaut de Schotten, M., Tomaiuolo, F. & Bartolomeo, P. White matter (dis)connections and Gray matter (dys)
                                      functions in visual neglect: gaining insights into the brain networks of Spatial awareness. Cortex 44, 983–995 (2008).
                                  19. Karnath, H. O., Rorden, C. & Ticini, L. F. Damage to white matter fiber tracts in acute Spatial neglect. Cereb. Cortex. 19, 2331–2337
                                      (2009).
                                  20. Umarova, R. M. et al. Attention-network specific alterations of structural connectivity in the undamaged white matter in acute
                                      neglect. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 4678–4692 (2014).
                                  21. Toba, M. N. et al. Common brain networks for distinct deficits in visual neglect. A combined structural and tractography MRI
                                      approach. Neuropsychologia 115, 167–178 (2018).
                                  22. Graff-Radford, N. R., Damasio, H., Yamada, T., Eslinger, P. J. & Damasio, A. R. Nonhaemorrhagic thalamic infarction. Clinical,
                                      neuropsychological and electrophysiological findings in four anatomical groups defined by computerized tomography. Brain 108,
                                      485–516 (1985).
                                  23. Karnath, H. O., Himmelbach, M. & Rorden, C. The subcortical anatomy of human Spatial neglect: putamen, caudate nucleus and
                                      pulvinar. Brain 125, 350–360 (2002).
                                  24. Ten Brink, A. F., Biesbroek, J. M., Oort, Q., Visser-Meily, J. M. A. & Nijboer, T. C. W. Peripersonal and extrapersonal visuospatial
                                      neglect in different frames of reference: A brain lesion-symptom mapping study. Behav. Brain Res. 356, 504–515 (2019).
                                  25. Watson, R. T., Valenstein, E. & Heilman, K. M. Thalamic neglect. Possible role of the medial thalamus and nucleus reticularis in
                                      behavior. Arch. Neurol. 38, 501–506 (1981).
                                  26. Parr, T. & Friston, K. J. The computational anatomy of visual neglect. Cereb. Cortex. 28, 777–790 (2018).
                                  27. Saxena, S. et al. Disruptions of the human connectome associated with hemispatial neglect. Neurology 98, e107–e114 (2022).
                                  28. Alves, P. N., Forkel, S. J. & Corbetta, M. & Thiebaut de Schotten, M. The subcortical and neurochemical organization of the ventral
                                      and dorsal attention networks. Commun. Biol. 5, (2022).
                                  29. Warach, S., Dashe, J. F. & Edelman, R. R. Clinical outcome in ischemic stroke predicted by early diffusion-weighted and perfusion
                                      magnetic resonance imaging: A preliminary analysis. J. Cereb. Blood Flow. Metab. 16, 53–59 (1996).
                                  30. Saur, D., Buchert, R., Knab, R., Weiller, C. & Röther, J. Iomazenil-Single-Photon emission computed tomography reveals selective
                                      neuronal loss in magnetic Resonance-Defined mismatch areas. Stroke 37, 2713–2719 (2006).
                                  31. Karnath, H. O. et al. Normalized perfusion MRI to identify common areas of dysfunction: patients with basal ganglia neglect.
                                      Brain 128, 2462–2469 (2005).
                                  32. Hillis, A. E., Tuffiash, E., Wityk, R. J. & Barker, P. B. Regions of neural dysfunction associated with impaired naming of actions and
                                      objects in acute stroke. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 19, 523–534 (2002).
                                  33. Doricchi, F. & Tomaiuolo, F. The anatomy of neglect without hemianopia: A key role for parietal-frontal disconnection? Neuroreport
                                      14, 26–36 (2003).
                                  34. Cha, S. et al. White matter tracts involved in subcortical unilateral Spatial neglect in subacute stroke. Front. Neurol. 13, (2022).
                                  35. Karnath, H. O. A right Perisylvian neural network for human Spatial orienting in The Cognitive Neurosciences IV (ed Gazzaniga,
                                      M. S.) 259–268 (MIT Press, (2009).
                                  36. Karnath, H. O., Rennig, J., Johannsen, L. & Rorden, C. The anatomy underlying acute versus chronic Spatial neglect: a longitudinal
                                      study. Brain 134, 903–912 (2011).
                                  37. Sperber, C. & Karnath, H. O. Topography of acute stroke in a sample of 439 right brain damaged patients. NeuroImage Clin. 10,
                                      (2016).
                                  38. Wiesen, D., Sperber, C., Yourganov, G., Rorden, C. & Karnath, H. O. Using machine learning-based lesion behavior mapping to
                                      identify anatomical networks of cognitive dysfunction: Spatial neglect and attention. Neuroimage 201, 116000 (2019).
                                  39. Joliot, M. et al. An atlas of intrinsic connectivity of homotopic areas. J. Neurosci. Methods 254. AICHA, 46–59 (2015).
                                  40. Weintraub, S. & Mesulam, M. M. Mental State Assessment of Young and Elderly Adults in Behavioral Neurology in Principles of
                                      Behavioral Neurology, (ed. Mesulam, M.M.) 71–123 (F.A. Davis Company,1985).
                                  41. Gauthier, L., Dehaut, F. & Joanette, Y. The bells test: A quantitative and qualitative test for visual neglect. Int. J. Clin. Neuropsychol.
                                      11, 49–54 (1989).
                                  42. Rorden, C. & Karnath, H. O. A simple measure of neglect severity. Neuropsychologia 48, 2758–2763 (2010).
                                  43. De Haan, B., Clas, P., Juenger, H., Wilke, M. & Karnath, H. O. Fast semi-automated lesion demarcation in stroke. NeuroImage Clin.
                                      9, 69–74 (2015).
                                  44. Rorden, C., Bonilha, L., Fridriksson, J., Bender, B. & Karnath, H. O. Age-specific CT and MRI templates for Spatial normalization.
                                      Neuroimage 61, 957–965 (2012).
                                  45. Boes, A. D. et al. Network localization of neurological symptoms from focal brain lesions. Brain 138, 3061–3075 (2015).
                                  46. Wawrzyniak, M., Klingbeil, J., Zeller, D., Saur, D. & Classen, J. The neuronal network involved in self-attribution of an artificial
                                      hand: A lesion network-symptom-mapping study. Neuroimage 166, 317–324 (2018).
                                  47. Griffis, J. C., Metcalf, N. V., Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Lesion quantification toolkit: A MATLAB software tool for estimating
                                      grey matter damage and white matter disconnections in patients with focal brain lesions. NeuroImage Clin. 30, 102639 (2021).
                                  48. Yeh, F. C. et al. Population-averaged atlas of the macroscale human structural connectome and its network topology. Neuroimage
                                      178, 57–68 (2018).
                                  49. Vaessen, M. J., Saj, A., Lovblad, K. O., Gschwind, M. & Vuilleumier, P. Structural white-matter connections mediating distinct
                                      behavioral components of Spatial neglect in right brain-damaged patients. Cortex 77, 54–68 (2016).
                                  50. Bürgel, U. et al. White matter fiber tracts of the human brain: three-dimensional mapping at microscopic resolution, topography
                                      and intersubject variability. Neuroimage 29, 1092–1105 (2006).
                                  51. Rickers, E. et al. Corticospinal tract lesion quantification: distinct approaches and their association with motor impairment after
                                      stroke. Clin. Neurophysiol. 159, e24–e25 (2024).
                                  52. Mrah, S. et al. Network-level prediction of set-shifting deterioration after lower-grade glioma resection. J. Neurosurg. 1–9. ​h​t​t​p​s​:/​ ​/​
                                      d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/1​ ​0​.​3​1​7​1​/​2​02​ ​2​.​1​.​j​n​s​2​12​ ​2​5​7​​​​ (2022).



Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                     | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                                           10
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  53. Sperber, C., Gallucci, L., Smaczny, S. & Umarova, R. Bayesian lesion-deficit inference with Bayes factor mapping: key advantages,
                                      limitations, and a toolbox. Neuroimage 271, 120008 (2023).
                                  54. Wagenmakers, E. J. et al. Bayesian inference for psychology. Part II: example applications with JASP. Psychon Bull. Rev. 25, 58–76
                                      (2018).
                                  55. de Haan, B. & Karnath, H. O. Whose atlas I use, his song I sing?’ – The impact of anatomical atlases on fiber tract contributions to
                                      cognitive deficits after stroke. Neuroimage 163, 301–309 (2017).
                                  56. Riley, J. D. et al. Anatomy of stroke injury predicts gains from therapy. Stroke 42, 421–426 (2011).
                                  57. Herbet, G. & Duffau, H. Contribution of the medial eye field network to the voluntary deployment of visuospatial attention. Nat.
                                      Commun. 13, 328 (2022).
                                  58. Radanovic, M. & Almeida, V. N. Subcortical aphasia. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 21, 73 (2021).
                                  59. Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., Rizzo, M., Varney, N. & Gersh, F. Aphasia with nonhemorrhagic lesions in the basal ganglia and
                                      internal capsule. Arch. Neurol. 39, 15–20 (1982).
                                  60. Alexander, M. P., Naeser, M. A. & Palumbo, C. L. Correlations of subcorticalct lesion sites and aphasia profiles. Brain 110, 961–988
                                      (1987).
                                  61. Stockert, A. et al. Involvement of thalamocortical networks in patients with poststroke thalamic aphasia. Neurology 100, e485–e496
                                      (2023).
                                  62. van Ravenzwaaij, D. & Wagenmakers, E. J. Advantages Masquerading as Issues in Bayesian Hypothesis Testing: A Commentary on
                                      Tendeiro and Kiers Psychol. Methods 27, 451–465 (2022). (2019).

                                  Author contributions
                                  CS: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Writing - Original Draft; HR: Method-
                                  ology, Formal Analysis, Writing - Original Draft; MW: Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing - Review and
                                  Editing; JK: Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing - Review and Editing; DS: Supervision, Writing - Review
                                  and Editing; HOK: Conceptualization, Resources, Investigation, Data Curation, Supervision, Writing - Review
                                  and Editing.

                                  Funding
                                  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
                                    This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (KA 1258/23 − 1; SA 1723/5 − 1). Max
                                  Wawrzyniak was supported by the Clinician Scientist Program of the Medical Faculty of Leipzig University.

                                  Declarations

                                  Competing interests
                                  The authors declare no competing interests.

                                  Additional information
                                  Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s:​ ​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g/​ ​1​
                                  0​.​1​0​3​8​/​s4​ ​1​5​9​8​-​0​2​5​-0​ ​1​7​0​3​-​x​​​​.​​
                                  Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.-O.K.
                                  Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
                                  Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                                  institutional affiliations.
                                  Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
                                  permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
                                  appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and
                                  indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s
                                  Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included
                                  in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
                                  exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy
                                  of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

                                  © The Author(s) 2025




Scientific Reports |   (2025) 15:18544                   | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01703-x                                                                 11
